
crucial keywords
#christopher-thinking
#undergrad-reading
#great-paper
#quote
#podcast
#staring-ceiling
#items
#study-mimic
#edge
#explanation
#grouped-ideas
#next-study
#research-idea
#next-aom
#write-review-paper
#humor
#social-animal
#ob-notes
#to-watch
#working-idea
#full-article-notes
#descriptive-data (useful data from the real world)
#best-ideas-list
#business-idea
#mimic-business
#tools
#fundamentals
#literature-summary
#christopher-theory
#ob-insight
#marketing-genius
#opener-practice
#bumble



projects
#pg-goodhart
#pg-blm
#pg-red-tape
#pg-brooks-law
#pg-attributions
#research-idea







# the core areas that I know a lot about

Learning
- instructional methods
- memory hieararchy
- learning curves
- deliberate practice

Clear writing

Statistical mistakes
- Inference box
- RTM
- Sampling biases
- Survivor bias
- Campbell's law
- Realizations of a process/distribution
- truth => observe => model

Cooperation
- causes (shared fate, reciprocity, justice, future, group)
- evolution (war/danger, risk pooling)

Performance/Expertise/Motivation
- Pareto or 80/20
- Division of labor
- VIE
- Optimal foraging
- Optimal stopping
- Time discounting
- Incentives, feedback, recognition, goals
- Risk aversion & loss framing

Finance

Evolution

Systems Archetypes

Data Science

My images
- snowflake
- shared fate/surrogation/conformity in academia
- darwin combine ideas story



#breadth-depth
#fundamental-concepts
#christopher-note
#what-do-i-know









# talk to anyone


(a) Convey a story in one sentence. What happened; how it made you feel; cliff into the story.
I'll tell you about what happened to me the other day. My asshole is still bleeding from this story.
Two years ago I was attacked by a dog and was so frightened I lost my t-shirt.

(b) ask for stories. ask for feelings.

Tell me about the moment [the time you]...
Tell me how...
How does it feel to...
What emotions does X evoke in you...
What do you think most people do not understand about...

(c) general conversation: you want to see and discuss conflict, problem solving, then resolution

How to respond to people's questions.
Conflict, problem solving, resolutuion

(d) responding to people's sentences/speech

[they are talking about thing X]

[personal]
My personal experience with thing X
The emotions thing X evokes in me
What memories you have with X
How your view of X has changed over the years
My philosophy of thing X is
[meta]
Why was that on your mind?
Free associate
[repeat]
So, you were doing X?
[questions to ask them to stick on the topic]
specifics about X
broader context about X
their personal stuff with X


(e) open-ended questions

Not "do you like your parents" but...
How did your relationship with your parents become the way it is?
What did you learn about...
What do you think X has added to your life?



#social-animal












# fundamentals





birthdays
Rory Sept 6, 2017
Bowen Aug 29, 2019
Conroy Jan 12, 2022
Leeanna June 25
Josh Aug 5, 1990
Tim Sept 6, 1966


core insights

# staring ceieling / meaning of life / eric hoffer

To suffer with dignity (nazi camps + education/learning is painful)
[what is success]
[that is my idea of happiness]
[tolstoy: three questions]
[a low but accurate view of one's own nature plus the capacity for wonder at the oddness of life]
[Imitate. Fall into a problem demanded of you by the world. Like napping during the car ride home / 
Embed / 
Union / 
Someone articulates something you've always felt but could not put words to / 
harmony (dancing) / alignment]
Play / tinker / experiment
Dichotomies:
- control / agency
- meaning / future / purpose / pointlessness


# what I know (research)

Learning

Clear writing

Statistical mistakes

Cooperation

Performance/Expertise/Motivation/Satisfaction

Finance

Academia/wokeness

Science & Measurement

Systems Archetypes

Economics
- Marginal Costs / Escalation of commitment
- When prices go up, people do less of things

My images
- snowflake
- shared fate/surrogation/conformity in academia
- darwin combine ideas story


# best humor and conversation and speaking with others

(a) flirt opener

describe. white on top. black on bottom. great combo.
Just wanted to say hi for a second, maybe get your number.
My name is Christopher

tease tease tease / push pull
super comfortable ... now is that to make up for your uncomfortable personality or what?
often paired with guitar ... but idk something tells me you have no musical talent whatsoever
I've never seen a dodgeball instructor up close before.


(b) misdirect

"clearly used for"

(c) push pull

"staring at that phone. half of me thinks you must be reading a profound article. and the other half of me thinks you have no self control"
"comfortable clothes. You must make up for your uncomfortable personality by wearing comfortable clothes."
"you look like you take more than you give in a relationship"

(d) goofy

you know a long term side effect of X is..."inability to complete coherent thoughts"
kirk correlation
when I look at you, I get the same feeling as..."when I sit on a cold toilet seat"
you look like/got a face only a mother could love/his version of X is
Death before...dishonor [I think I'd rather die before getting a tattoo like that]
I have yet to see any evidence of it...


# say hello to someone on the street


a) outfit, great combo

[dark coat with white shoes]
Hello ma'am, love that outfit. Dark on top. Light white shoes on the bottom. Great combo.

Just wanted to say hi for a second, maybe get your number. How is your day going?

Is that right? A lot of people walking up to you with that outfit?

[if she says, "oh I just threw this on today. Not a big deal. I don't look good."]
Oh my, a girl who is pretty but also modest, it is almost like you were made for me. 
Oh my, are you both pretty and modest...
Although I'm not sure. Part of me thinks you are kind an innocent, and part of me thinks you're the devil. 


clothes look comfortable, super tailored. 
You make up for your discomfort with your personality by wearing as comfortable clothes as possible


b) push pull / tease (never think you don't deserve to speak)

You're a good looking girl, but those are some strange nostrils.
You're a good looking girl, except for those nostrils. Those are a little funny looking. 
Lifeless
Devil
Innocent yet trouble
Fiesty
Shady
Dork
Fussy
Scatter-brained
Nosy
Bosy
Indecisive
Forgetful




# humor & deep conversations

-] Misdirection: "what does my audience expect me to say?" Then say the opposite. Describe, then say unexpected. 

Talk about what you see in front of you. "That thing is clearly used to..." then break what is expected. 
If your mother were here she would die of shame. 
He must hide his forked-tongued red tail in those baggy pants. First she had to spit her gum out. 

He won't be here today. He is doing something very important. Something that will establish entirely new ground for the scientific enterprise. Something that will change the course of history in the next 50 years. He went to walmart to buy a new pair of socks.

-] Feelings

How did you feel when...[regret, love, aspire to, happiest/saddist]
What do you think most people don't understand about X...?


-] Prep stories / All in 3 sentences

I'll tell you about what happened to me the other day. My asshole is still bleeding from this story.
Two years ago I was attacked by a dog and was so frightened I lost my t-shirt...

-] Push pull

Lifeless eyes
Half of me thinks you are kind and peaceful, and half of me thinks you spent a lot of time doing... let's say devious things. 

-] Warned...one of whom was a dog

Listen, I was warned by two people about this...one of whom was a dog.

-] Look at you, same feeling as

When I look at you, I get the same feeling as when I sit down on a cold toilet seat.


# Humor


00) no time for drake (key and peele)

State word ("hat")
Find a word that rhymes ("cat")
Add, "I can't be concerned..."
I can't be concerned with wearing a hat. If I wear a hat it makes me look like my head contains a cat. 

0) buz double meaning/reverse ending & ledderman "if you can't"

Be careful; swing dancing is very dangerous. 
One of my close friends started dancing, before he knew it he was married with two kids.
Very dangerous. 

I heard they are starting to advertise phentonal on the AYG podcast.
If you can't get a sponsorship by monster energy, you go with phentonal. 

She's built like a heroin needle. 

He looks like he could impersonate an orangutang

If there were a law against X you'd be in prison. 


1) he compensates for his X with Y

2) Starts with "f" and ends with "at"

3) his version of X is Y

4) he has the x (body/legs/smile/scent) of ...

5) are you garbage / infer

This guy is garbage. I bet he...

eats hot dogs on two slices of wonder bread
goes skiing with jeans
continued to go to high school football games after graduating

From his posture and gait, he is either depressed or constipated.
If he is here, who is gaurding hades?
Interesting that he is here and not still crushed under that house in munchkinland

6) respond with absurdity & double meanings & defy endings

"What are you thinking about?"

What am I thinking about?
- I'm pondering the question, how many chickens would it take to kill a crocodile?
- If I'm waiting for the waiter, does that make me the waiter?

"How many people work at your office?"

About a third of them. 

7) preface with profound phrase

[Do you know why?]
[You know what I've learned in my life? I've learned many lessons, but the greatest lesson I've learned is...]
[Let it be known]


8) golf guys

You seem like someone who has a lot of expensive but unappealing artwork in your home
You look like you teach classes on UFOs in Texas
This guy was told in high school, "you can't raise mynx as pets" and he responded, "challenge accepted."
You look like you could impersonate an orangutang.
you look like your middle name is run of the mill
you look like the amount on your taco bell receipts is more than your rent
You've got the face only a mother could love
WHEN I LOOK AT YOU, I GET THE SAME FEELING AS WHEN I SIT DOWN ON A COLD TOILET SEAT.
































# reventure consulting


if opendoor technologies reaches between $10-15 per share, create a put option to expire in a year betting that the stock will go down to $2. 

#reventure-consulting










# yield curve inversion

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iyBcrqB4TOY

You can predict that the market will go into a recession, but you cannot predict when it will happen.

Time in the market trumps market timing.

keywords
#finance
#investing
#undergrad-reading
#prediction
#stats-ideas
#great-paper










# most students don't read

3 decades ago, 70% of 12th graders read a book for pleasure daily.
Today, only 5% do.

images/no-reading.png

keywords
- #world-trends
- #bad-writing
- #generational-differences
- #image-note











# world population exponential growth

images/world-population.png

keywords
- #image-note
#world-population












# example survey items

Dissertations with good example items

images/good-items.pdf
images/good-items2.pdf

#example-survey-items
#measures
#questionnaires
#ob-items
#qualtrics







# organizational behavior youtube

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8dPuuaLjXtMBsfP-lP28IFvfkISqJofM

#ob-youtube
#youtube
#organizational-behavior-youtube







# Learning and how it transfers to a new domain

Birds are fed by their parents in their infancy. When the time comes to feed themselves, there can be some confusion when the food does not go into their mouth by itself.

https://twitter.com/i/status/1582504199015002112

#bird-learning
#learned-helplessness
#christopher-note
#learning
#transfer-of-learning






# goodhart examples

The Rise of the Worker Productivity Score
Across industries and incomes, more employees are being tracked, recorded and ranked. What is gained, companies say, is efficiency and accountability. What is lost?
By Jodi Kantor and Arya Sundaram
Produced by Aliza Aufrichtig and Rumsey Taylor
Aug. 14, 2022
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/08/14/business/worker-productivity-tracking.html

‘Spiritual Care Drive-Bys’
IN THE FIRST MONTH after joining the group of hospice chaplains in Minnesota, the Rev. Heather Thonvold was invited to five potlucks. To endure the constant sorrow of the work, the more than a dozen clergy members ministered to one another. Sometimes the cantor in the group played guitar for his mostly Protestant colleagues. There was comfort in regarding their work as a calling, several of them said.

In August 2020, the productivity revolution arrived for them in an email from their employer, a nonprofit called Allina Health.

“The timing is not ideal,” the message said, with the team already strained by the pandemic. But workloads varied too widely, and “the stark reality at this point is we cannot wait any longer.”

Allina was already keeping track of productivity, but now there would be stricter procedures with higher expectations. Every morning the chaplains would share on a spreadsheet the number of “productivity points” they anticipated earning. Every evening, software would calculate whether they had met their goals.

But dying defied planning. Patients broke down, canceled appointments, drew final breaths. This left the clergy scrambling and in a perpetual dilemma. “Do I see the patients who earn the points or do I see the patients who really need to be seen?” as Mx. Thonvold put it.

At the chaplains’ meetings, they shared their apprehension. The type of attention and care that had drawn them to this work could impede their point totals, they told their managers. The dying were often lonely, and the difficulty of travel during the pandemic left them more isolated. Some asked questions with no short answers, like “What’s it like to die?” Ms. Richardson said.

“People’s entire life experiences come into play,” she continued. “You get it all: the tears, the anger, the guilt.”

Status: Active

‘Spiritual Care Drive-Bys’
IN THE FIRST MONTH after joining the group of hospice chaplains in Minnesota, the Rev. Heather Thonvold was invited to five potlucks. To endure the constant sorrow of the work, the more than a dozen clergy members ministered to one another. Sometimes the cantor in the group played guitar for his mostly Protestant colleagues. There was comfort in regarding their work as a calling, several of them said.

In August 2020, the productivity revolution arrived for them in an email from their employer, a nonprofit called Allina Health.

“The timing is not ideal,” the message said, with the team already strained by the pandemic. But workloads varied too widely, and “the stark reality at this point is we cannot wait any longer.”

Sara Cooksey, tktk with marketing agency
MARKETING AGENCY
Sara Cooksey
Operations AssociateMs. Cooksey craves greater tracking, she said, because she suspects that a colleague on her team is doing far less than she is. “There’s no accountability when we’re working from home,” she said.
Eva Marie Uzcategui for The New York Times
Allina was already keeping track of productivity, but now there would be stricter procedures with higher expectations. Every morning the chaplains would share on a spreadsheet the number of “productivity points” they anticipated earning. Every evening, software would calculate whether they had met their goals.

But dying defied planning. Patients broke down, canceled appointments, drew final breaths. This left the clergy scrambling and in a perpetual dilemma. “Do I see the patients who earn the points or do I see the patients who really need to be seen?” as Mx. Thonvold put it.

At the chaplains’ meetings, they shared their apprehension. The type of attention and care that had drawn them to this work could impede their point totals, they told their managers. The dying were often lonely, and the difficulty of travel during the pandemic left them more isolated. Some asked questions with no short answers, like “What’s it like to die?” Ms. Richardson said.

“People’s entire life experiences come into play,” she continued. “You get it all: the tears, the anger, the guilt.”

Sometimes the chaplains sacrificed points, risking reprimand or trying to make them up later. But their jobs depended on meeting the standards. So they shifted whom they saw when, the time they spent and the depth of their relationships with the dying, some said. Group settings like nursing homes were rich sources of points. Single patients in homes dotting the greater Minneapolis-St. Paul area were not.

“This is going to sound terrible,” Mx. Thonvold said, “but every now and again I would do what I thought of as ‘spiritual care drive-bys’” to rack up points. If a patient was sleeping, “I could just talk to the nurse and say, ‘Are there any concerns?’ It counted as a visit because I laid eyes.”

But last summer, Ms. Richardson and Mx. Thonvold came to the same conclusion: The metrics prevented them from fulfilling their calling. They quit.

Allina’s director of hospice, Lisa Abicht, said in a statement that the company was “extremely proud of the high-quality and compassionate hospice care” its teams provide. Since the productivity changes, she said, employees’ goals and performance were more transparent, workloads were more balanced, and “patient satisfaction scores” and “employee sustainable engagement” scores were up.

The productivity project, she said, had been a success.

[[[on the other hand, some people want tracking

Sara Cooksey
Operations AssociateMs. Cooksey craves greater tracking, she said, because she suspects that a colleague on her team is doing far less than she is. “There’s no accountability when we’re working from home,” she said.


[[another example]]
Indeed, in research involving more than 8,000 senior managers in biotech, banking, consumer products, energy, law, and other sectors, the authors found that a siloed approach to performance targets is a huge barrier to collaboration. Too many companies incentivize employees to take an overly narrow, short-term view, which makes them scramble to hit their numbers and lose sight of their organizations’ bigger objectives. 



images/goodhart-in-abstract

images/goodhart-monetary


#goodhart-example
#goodharts-law
#campbells-law
#minnesota-goodhart
#chaplains
#chaplain-goodhart









# undergrad reading on mis-use of y-axis

Dude says that songs today use more "hate" lyrics whereas songs in the past used more "love" lyrics. But look at the y-axis...they are on different scales. 

The hate lyrics have not overtaken the love lyrics. The hate lyrics are simply trending up. 

images/trend-up-but-absolute-yaxis

#undergrad-reading
#research-methods
#false-yaxis








# autism score

images/autism-quiz.pdf

#autism-questionnaire







# Kunze et al. "Age diversity, age discrimination, climate and performance"

Cleary their results are an artifact of what they were studying. Their choice of variables. This is not a true process. It is not a "let's try to break it, and whatever we cannot break must be correct" study.

keywords:
- #undergraduate-reading
- #philosophy-of-science

















# Baumann et al., 2020 “a linear threshold model…”

Paper about optimal stopping.

Previous optimal stopping findings
- In secretary problem, optimal policy is ascertain the maximum of the first 37% of options and choose the next best that exceeds your threshold
- In experiments, people follow this strategy but they choose a max threshold way before 37%

Previous optimal stopping computational models:
- probability of selecting option i = utility of i - your perception of the threshold right now

What they do
- your perception of the threshold now is a linear function of what it was at the last time point.




The gist of how people differ from optimal stopping (based on curvinlinear model)
- optimal stop says you should have a really low probability of accepting for a long time
- then, as you near the end, your probability of selecting should go way up
- for actual humans, their curve is relatively flat
- we select “ok” options early
- once we get to the end, we continue to wait too long for “the next best.”




Overall
- good prior lit on optimal stopping and simple models that could be implemented in a comp model



#optimal-stopping








# don't be a perfectionist

More often than not
Good enough
Less wrong




#grouped-ideas


















# Roulin, N., & Krings, F. (2020). Faking to fit in: Applicants’ response strategies to match organizational culture. Journal of Applied Psychology, 105(2), 130.




Nicolas Roulin
Mturk twice. same participants. I want to do this. Ask him for a walk through. 

Pay prolific employee 100 bucks to walk me through their platform. 


Hook
- fit is important
- applicants probably believe that their cultural fit is pivotal for receiving an offer
- studies on the CULTURAL (fit) antecedents of faking are scarce. Most examine individual differences and test characteristics. 




#
# study 1

Effect of competitive org culture on faking two traits, honesty and agreeableness.

Imagine applying for a job
Receive an email from a current employing who describes the culture (competitive or not).
Take personality test used by company for hiring. 
Take personality test again 2 weeks later in different context.

Faking = difference between second test and first test. 

In competitive culture, you show lower agreeable scores than you do when you are just rating your own agreeableness honestly. 

In a non-competitive culture, you show higher agreeable scores than you do when you are just rating your own agreeableness honestly.

So, participants who imagined applying at a competitive org faked their personality to resemble a competitive person. 


repeat for innovative vs non innovative cultures (and the personality trait of oppeness).

repeat to demonstrate mediator: perceptions of ideal personality profile
- take a given personality trait. Rate the extent to which the hiring organization wants its employees to posses this trait. 


#
# later study

Does faking to increase PO fit still occur when individuals choose the orgs they apply at?

Another adaptive behavior consists of applying to only those organizations that exhibit a culture that fits with one’s own values, as highlighted by the attraction-selection-attrition model (Schneider, 1987; Schneider, Goldstein, & Smith, 1995). The model argues that individuals select themselves into and out of organizational settings as a function of the organization's values or culture. Hence, applicants choose where they want to apply and often select organizations whose values and culture fit their own values and personality. Indeed, applicants’ perceptions of P-O fit are associated with organizational attraction and job acceptance (Judge & Cable, 1997; Kristof‐Brown et al., 2005; Uggerslev, Fassina, & Kraichy, 2012). Also, employees working in the same organization tend to have homogeneous personality profiles (Schneider, Smith, Taylor, & Fleenor, 1998).


Choose one of 8 orgs to apply at. Here is the org logo and a one-paragraph description of its culture (orgs varied on competitiveness, based on objective coding of actual companies by the authors). 

No difference in choice by age, gender, ethnicity, or education.

Applicants who were lower on honesty and higher on competitive worldviews were more likely to choose an org with competitive culture.

Overall, 29% of participants chose an org with a competitive culture, whereas 71% chose an org with a less competitive culture. 

They replicated this. 



#
# Discussion

People infer the personality profile of a presumably ideal employee from information about the organizational culture, and then fake accordingly on a personality inventory. Results of our studies show that this type of faking is highly specific because applicants fake only on targeted traits, in a specific manner. For example, in competitive cultures, they portray themselves as being less honest and agreeable, whereas in innovative cultures, they portray themselves as more open and extraverted, thus displaying precisely the personality profile that is most closely aligned with higher levels of competitiveness or innovativeness.



#competitive-culture
#asa
#faking
#vignette
#self-selection
#full-article-notes
#pg-goodhart
#pg-blm


# christopher thinking

[how to mesh with blm]

Supervisor blm => employee blm

theory says this relationship exists because of manager manipulation. I think it is due to asa.

Is that a big enough theoretical contribution? We already know that asa happens. 

how to make it bigger
- conditions under which...
- how do my esm models change if we assume one mechanism or another. In orgs where self selection happened...we should see. In orgs where manager manipulation happened, we should see...


[how to mesh with goodhart]
surveys in field
- qualifier: company recently implemented a new tracking system or measure or ...
- perceptions of attribution
- other self reports

vignette
- company implements measure/track.
- for reason A, for reason B
- what would you do?


#
# another vignette in 

Wang, D., Ou, A. Y., & Song, L. J. (2022). Stay Humble and Fly High: The Roles of Subordinate Voice and Competitive Work Context in the Linkage Between Leader Humility and Career Success. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 29(1), 147-166.

Read about leader (type a or type b)
Read about work context (type a or type b).
Self report surveys.

Vignettes:

Leader: Humble condition. Your competent manager Yang Liu has been rated a star manager for three years. He:
• actively seeks feedback, even if it is critical.
• acknowledges when others have more knowledge and
skills.
• often compliments subordinates on their strengths.
• is willing to learn from others and demonstrates open-
ness to the advice of others.

Leader: Non-humble condition. Your competent manager Yang Liu has been rated a star manager for three years. He:
• rarely seeks feedback and becomes angry when he receives critical comments from subordinates.
• always appears to know everything and never acknowledges when others have more knowledge and skills.
• never compliments subordinates on their strengths.
• seems closed to advice and is unwilling to learn from
others.






#christopher theory of innovation

People are obsessed with "new idea" version of innovation. I have to come up with a profound new way of seeing the world.

How about you make something that takes a good idea and makes it easier for the rest of the world to use that good idea.

How about you make something that filters out the bad ideas.


#christopher-thinking
#edge








# fix "hiearchy and the power-law income distribution"


Why are incomes distributed acorrding to a power law?

Simon and others point to rich get richer dynamics. If new money (interest) accrues proportion to current wealth, then over time this wealth accumulates exponentially. 

This guy proposes hierarchy. If people work in firms under hierarchical structures (CEOs in charge of 10 leaders, 10 leaders in charge of 20 employee), then the number of employees at each rank decreases expentially as you move up ranks. 

If you combine above with the notion that pay is greater for those at the top of the hierarchy than it is for those at the bottom of the hierarchy, then the outcome is a power law distribution. 

So, income must be distributed as a power law if we are to operate in a world with firm hierarchies (CEOs, leaders, managers, etc.)

keywords
#income
#power-laws
#economics
#blair-fix
#hierarchy
#simon-reference-and-explain
#edge
#explanation






# christopher notice how other people took the OCB research:

I read the OCB handbook and thought of ideas for my dissertation. Here is where other people took it:

1) 

Use a moderator to explain the OCB-objective-performance link.

Fu, N., Flood, P. C., Rousseau, D. M., & Morris, T. (2021). Resolving the individual helping and objective job performance dilemma: The moderating effect of team reflexivity. Journal of Business Research, 129, 236-243.
- OCBs are supposedly great for orgs, yet Bergeron shows that they relate negatively to objective performance (time-allocation theory: you can't be helping while you are performing).
- We build a theory that specifies the conditions under which helping leads to better objective performance and when it leads to worse objective performance: you have to consider the key moderator of team reflexivity (the extent to which the team plans and considers what to do next)


2)

The lit has not distinguished "unprovoked" helping from "responding to a request."

Harari, D., Parke, M. R., & Marr, J. C. (2021). When helping hurts helpers: Anticipatory versus reactive helping, helper’s relative status, and recipient self-threat. Academy of Management Journal, (ja).


Research on workplace helping has suggested that helpers receive positive outcomes from recipients in return for their help. We argue that this predominantly positive view of recipient reactions to helpers is because the literature has not adequately distinguished the outcomes of reactive helping (i.e., assistance provided in response to a request) from those of anticipatory helping (i.e., assistance offered or provided in advance of being asked). We propose that anticipatory helping, especially from helpers with higher status than the recipient, is more self-threatening to recipients than is reactive helping; hence, recipients are less likely to accept this help and more likely to lower their evaluations of both the helper’s performance and their relationship with the helper. We find support for these hypotheses with four studies and one supplemental study that use experimental and field methodologies across a range of work contexts and social exchange relationships. Because our findings imply that both peer- and higher-status employees should withhold anticipatory help, which is impractical and potentially detrimental, we identify how these helpers can instead mitigate the negative effects of anticipatory helping by signaling a more balanced social exchange relationship with the recipient. We discuss how our findings expand research on helping, social exchange, and status.


[christopher]
So, they copied gerhart's idea but added status. Gerhart already raised this, but these authors still say "it has not been adequately addressed." Then, they added a status moderator. 





# kuwabara 2022 "lay theories of instrumental relations"

People who hold a fixed (versus growth) theory of instrumental relations believe that relationships form primarily on the basis of natural compatibility (versus effort), ... and these people are more likely to avoid dissimilar others at the work place.

Finally (Experiment 2), we manipulate lay theories to show that inducing growth theories increases people’s satisfaction with a task partner who is dispositionally dissimilar. 

Good example of a dissertation. 

Also, to get an AMJ pub, you include a "growth vs fixed mindset manipulation" as a way of saying, "here is a practical application."

#amj
#lay-theories
#growth-mindset
#mimic-study
#graduate-study-mimic

Kuwabara, K., Cao, J., Cho, S. S., & Ingram, P. (2022). Lay Theories of Instrumental Relations: Explaining Individual Differences in Dispositional Similarity-Attraction. Academy of Management Journal, (ja).












# research ideas: cluster

[coordination cluster]
Most difficult individual differences to mentally traverse?
Lay theory of coordination. 

put my lay theory of coordination idea thing into words:
When planners decide how to coordinate, they favor satisfaction over efficiency

don't forget about: 
mythbusting, 
practical action thresholds (simulation and write up)
perspective getting

#research-idea
#next-study







# research idea: effects of pay over different allocation schedules

pay over 9 month contract vs 12 months yearly (no difference in amount).

Faculty at CMU: I am on a 9 month contract, so you can't ask me to do anything over the summer. 
[christopher]: but why does it matter whether 100k is allocated over 9 months vs 12 months?

#research-idea
#next-study











# Taylor, P. J., & Pierce, J. L. (1999). Effects of introducing a performance management system on employees' subsequent attitudes and effort. Public personnel management, 28(3), 423-452.

Org commitment changes after implementing performance management system. Different effects depending on low vs high performing employees. 

Most employees expected a higher performance rating than received. 

A longitudinal evaluation was conducted on the effects of introducing a performance management system (PMS), which featured merit-based bonus pay, on subsequent employee attitudes and self-reported work effort in a small, government organization.

A significant change in employees' organizational commitment occurred over the time that the PMS was implemented, with a substantial increase occurring within the performance planning/goal-setting phase, followed by a slight decay over the following year, but still ending higher than the pre-PMS baseline level.


#full-article-notes
#performance-management
#pg-goodhart
#great-paper































ended
2022 - dec 22 vol 65 (6)






# temporal boredom relates to feelings of time passing slowly, which relates to low performance


fast or slow: how temporal work design (zhao, deng, chen, parker, zhang)

Two work design things that can make employees feel like time is going faster (which most people feel is more pleasant than when time moves slowly): no uncertain wait times before embarking on next task (temporal predictability) and segmenting work tasks.

By temporal predictability, they really mean "bored today because I had to stand around waiting for stuff to do"

[hook]
workdays can pass quickly for some but slow for others
workers’ experienced passage of time is a critical work experience that is not well understood in the management literature. In this paper, we seek to understand the following questions: Is it possible to alter employees’ experienced passage of time via work design, and, if possible, are there any performance benefits of doing so?

[theory]
attentional gate model (Zakay & Block, 1995) 
use work design to increase perceptions of "time moved quickly today" (a pleasant experience)When people “watch a pot until it boils,” time seems to pass slowly because attention is devoted to the passage of time. On the other hand, when people immerse themselves in nontemporal aspects of the environment, time seems to pass quickly because they have no cognitive capacity to process the passage of time (Brown, 2008; Zakay, 1989).

[contributions]
1. contribute to the work design literature by identifying two novel temporal work design characteristics. 
2. we investigate a universal yet understudied work experience—time passing
quickly or slowly at work.
3. informs an emerging research program in management research: the time literature. To the best of our knowledge, the time literature within the management field has not yet systematically studied how employees experience work time differently and how such variations influence work outcomes (Shipp & Cole, 2015). 

[christopher note]
When people say contributions, what they really mean is "this study is relevant or related to X literature." That's not a contribution. It is not a critical test. It is not a gauntlet. 

[study1a]
Mturkers: you are invited to check other Mturker's typos
To manipulate temporal predictability, participants in the experimental condition were presented with a clear schedule of task time and break time. In contrast, those in the control condition did not know how long it would take for each task and each break, and they kept waiting until they were instructed to move on.

The four modified items for
temporal predictability were: (1) “In my typical work time, I spend a substantial portion of my day waiting for unpredictable events or tasks [R]”; (2) “I often find myself waiting for the next piece of work, which could happen at any time [R]”; (3) “In my job, I am often on ‘stand by’, waiting for a task to occur at some unknown time [R]”; and (4) “My workday involves lots of waiting for something to happen at some non-specified time [R].”

The four modified items for task segmentation were (1) “My daily work activities can be broken down to be performed in different blocks of time”; (2) “In my job, I carry out my work in small chunks of time”; (3) In my job, a workday is separated into smaller segments by clear ‘markers’”; (4) “My job provides opportunities to separate a long task into smaller chunks with a different activity in between.” 

Participants in the "I'm bored because I have to wait around" or "no task segmentation" conditions experienced time as moving slower and performed worse on a "check this equation for errors" task.


#ob-notes
#amj
#items
#survey-items
#questionnaire














# when leaders are perfectionists, then subordinates feel simultaneously engaged but exhausted


leader perfectionism -- friend or foe (xu, liu, ji, dong, wu)

Leader perfectionism -> employee engagement -> creativity
Leader perfectionism -> employee exhaustion -> less creativity (if employee has low LOC)


hook
some studies find that leader perfectionism harms employee creativity, other studies find that it boosts employee creativity.
We identify both positive and negative mechanisms of LP on employee creativity.

theory
Self-regulation starts from a perceived discrepancy between the current and desired state. LP creates a discrepancy, which triggers the need for employees' self-reg to fulfill perfectionistic requirements. Doing so drives engagement but consumes personal resources. 
Internals (people who believe they have control over events) can insulate themselves from depleting tasks.

contributions
Reconciles conflicting past findings
Most leader perfectionism research has focused on leader outcomes. We show leader-subordinate outcome.
Add to LOC lit by showing how LOC is a moderator.  

[christopher note]
Once again, they conflate "relevant for this lit" with "contribution." Reconciling conflicting findings is a contribution. "This study is located within this literature" is not a contribution.


#academese
#ob-notes
#amj






















# talk to your friends about your initial ideas before talking to network outsiders

inside-out, outside-in, or all-in-one? (wal, criscuolo, & salter)

Drawing on colleagues to gain feedback and support in the elaboration of one’s ideas can be a difficult process. Due to the ill-defined, ill- structured, and uncertain nature of early-stage ideas, individuals face a dual risk in that they may see their high-potential ideas dismissed for the wrong reasons if they expose them to the wrong people at the wrong time.

So, start with your inner-circle friends, because they will discuss (and not hound you for) ill-defined, ill-structured, or uncertain ideas. 


hook
People pursuing novel ideas need (harsh) feedback from others.
We know that networks are important, but no one has explored the "sequencing" people might use to gain helpful critiques but also mitigate the risks of having the wrong people be overly dismissive.
We introduce the concept of “inside-out” network sequencing as the practice by which individuals elaborating novel ideas mobilize feedback and support from their inner-circle ties before their outer-circle ones. 

contributions
1. in addition to network structure and position, the sequencing effects of networks also matter.
2. our research brings into focus the strategic nature of networking in relation to the pursuit of novel ideas in established organizations. we demonstrate that individuals elaborating creative ideas can outperform colleagues not only through the strategic pursuit of beneficial positions, but also by making savvy choices of who to involve when.
3. our study demonstrates that network mechanisms such as feedback depend on timing and embeddedness, and may backfire if mobilized at the wrong time.

theory
Early-stage ideas tend to be ill-defined and ill-structured.
The notion of the “lone genius” who builds an innovation from basic idea through to proof of concept and validation without direct or indirect input from others is inconsistent with the observation that most innovations materialize through social interaction.
The ideas need input from others to advance and develop, but mobilization at the wrong time can undermine the creative process.
Individuals benefit from exposing their ideas to their inner-circle ties early becuase
- such members are nicer to you (have patience)
- such members have greater knowledge overlap with you
Then, get feedback from outsiders once the ideas are developed. 


Building on research on social circles (Dunbar, 1998; Kadushin, 1968), social cohesion around relationships (Reagans and McEvily 2003; Tortoriello & Krackhardt, 2010; Tortoriello, Reagans, & McEvily, 2012), and innovation in mature organizations (Battilana & Casciaro, 2013; Criscuolo et al., 2014; Dougherty, 1992), we contend that the nature of the feedback and support an individual receives from any given colleague – and hence the best timing of first exposure of an idea to them – depends on the extent to which that colleague is embedded in the individual’s inner or outer circle of network contacts.

Inside-out network sequencing allows individuals to leverage the benefits of early feedback from inner-circle ties who are more likely to commit to spending time digesting ill-defined, ill-structured, and uncertain ideas, and to whose feedback the idea creator is receptive. At the same time, it allows individuals to shield early-stage ideas from outer-circle ties until they can better withstand the cold scrutiny of relative outsiders. Outer-circle ties are less likely to have the commitment and contextual knowledge to appreciate ideas at their earliest stages of elaboration, but their outsider perspective makes them ideally suited to offer complementary expertise and to externally validate ideas once they are more developed.



#great-paper
#amj
#ob-notes
#advice-generation
#idea-generation
#help-seeking
#advice
#advice-seeking
#networks


























# concrete people tend to focus on short term goals


painting a clear picture while seeing the big picture (carton, knowleton)


Should leaders speak with abstract visions or with concrete visions to motivate organizational change?

These authors say it depends on the firm's hierarchy (strength of hierarchy, whether flat or hierarchical). 

Couldn't understand the logic, but the notion of abstract vs concreteness makes sense.

Whereas an abstractly defined vision (“an environmentally friendly city”) is emotionally neu- tral and has many interpretations, a concrete vision (“a city full of hybrid cars”) is emotionally resonant and provides a clear sense of direction, improving the ability for employees to coordinate their efforts (Carton, Murphy, & Clark, 2014). In addition to inspiring others, leaders who generate concrete visions are also likely to be personally motivated to pursue change, because they can easily visualize success and then determine which action steps are needed to make progress (Stam et al., 2014).

Given these benefits, it would stand to reason that leaders are better positioned to spearhead positive change efforts if they are predisposed to think in terms of picture-like detail (a “concrete orientation” [Emmons, 1992]).1 Yet, a conundrum arises when considering a finding from research on cognition: people with a concrete orientation tend to think and speak about short-term goals rather than long-term goals, and focus on small operational details rather than overarching strategy (DeShon & Gillespie, 2005; Wiesenfeld, Reyt, Brockner, & Trope, 2017).



#ob-notes
#amj

























# unprompted help makes the recipient feel threatened (sort of like my dissertation but no OBJECTIVE requests)

Typical OB-style argument. The literature on X has predominantly seen it as positive. It can also be negative.

Also, they copied my exact "help after a request is different from un-prompted help" idea.

Does the recipient help feel threatened when the initial person offers help? If the other person is high status and helps without a prompt, then yes the receiver feels threatened.
If the receiver first asked for help, then all good.

hook
Org studies have mostly shown that positive reciprocity results after someone offers help at work.
However, other literatures on social support and advice suggest that individuals feel inferior or threatened when offered help. 
It is critical to reconsile these perspectives.
We contend that the answer is because past research has not differentiated two concepts
- reactive helping (assistance provided in response to a request)
- anticipatory helping (providing help without being asked)

How to frame stuff as an assumption
Driven largely by a narrative that maintains that “the majority of helping is done reactively” at work (Bolino & Grant, 2016: 622; see also Bamberger, 2009; Fisher, Pillemer, & Amabile, 2018: 1526), scholars have often explicitly or implicitly assumed that workplace helping is reactive, or have failed to distinguish it from anticipatory helping in their the- ory and empirics. This assumption is problematic, as emerging evidence has suggested that anticipatory helping may be far more common at work than cur- rently depicted (e.g., Grant, Parker, & Collins, 2009; Lee et al., 2019). Moreover, as we detail below, it is highly unlikely that anticipatory helping leads to the same positive social exchange outcomes as reactive helping due to its perceived threatening nature.

Theory
Integrate social exchange and self-affirmation theory.
Helping without a prompt is threateneing to receiver because it makes the recipient feel like they are receiving negative feedback about their competence. 
We posit that this increased self-threat from anticipatory helping in turn triggers defensive reactions found in exchange encounters: namely, reducing recipients’ willingness to accept help and undermining recipients’ ratings of the helper’s per- formance (i.e., extent to which an employee meets the expectations and requirements of their role or job [Griffin, Neal, & Parker, 2007]) and relational evalua- tions (i.e., degree of likeability, friendliness, or pleas- antness [Gibson, Harari, & Marr, 2018; Leach, Ellemers, & Barreto, 2007]).
Self-affirmation theory: people are motivated to maintain a positive self view. When people experience events that challenge their "sense of themselves as good, virtuous, and successful, they experience self-threat. When threatened, people take defensive actions such as avoiding, denying, or dismissing. 

Contributions
1. Contribute to helping literature by demonstrating the importance of distinguishing between reactive and anticipatory helping at work
2. Contribute to social exchange theory lit. A main tenant of social exchange theory is that positively valenced actions will be met with positive responses. By integrating self-affirmation theory with social exchange theory, we explain why a positive behavior may be met by a negative behavior.


Study1, vignette experiment (prolific)
Imagine high status (low status) coworker
Imagine him helping you (prompted vs unprompted)
DV questionnaire: self threat, willingness to accept help, liking of helper

Study2, field questionnaire
Prompted vs unprompted helping
Status of others
Self-threat

Study3, recall (prolific)
Reactive helping: “We would like you to describe an instance when you were working on a task and asked a coworker to help you and they provided you help—that is, they helped you on your task in response to your request.”
Anticipatory helping: “We would like you to describe an instance when you were working on a task and a coworker offered to help or helped you even though you had not asked for their help—that is, they helped you on your task although you did not request it.”
Questionnaires (self threat, whether participants accepted help from the coworker they recalled)



[christopher thinking]
Is there some fundamental assumption I can find that would be countered by random walks with help requests?
Theory OB says this happens and this happens. If so, requests for help should looks like Y. I find that they actually look like random walks with trend. 

"when helping hurts helpers" (harari, parke, marr)


#ob-notes
#helping
#my-dissertation-but-no-objective-requests
#amj
#marketing-genius













# People view their jobs favorably during economic recessions

Indeed, even when the quality of jobs is objectively worse, people sometimes evaluate jobs subjectively better depending on how they think about their jobs and the context in which they are assessed. We propose that challenging economic times will promote positive ways of thinking about and evaluating jobs. Specifi- cally, we argue that during economic downturns peo- ple will be less attuned to other possible jobs and more likely to view their own jobs favorably.

When unemployment is high and job options are limited, people are more likely to focus on the positive features of their jobs rather than dwelling on their shortcomings 

hook
Recessions are a huge factor of the American economy and workforce.
Little is known about how recessions influence the way people evaluate their jobs (PROBABLY NOT TRUE. ANY ECONOMICS STUDIES?)
We propose that...

contributions
1. Most job sat studies focus on conditions of workplace. We show that conditions outside of immediate job also matter.
2. Most prior theories say that negative events lead to negative employee outcomes. We show how a negative event actually cultivates job sat.


"does job satisfaction rise and fall with the economy?" (bianchi, martin, li)

#ob-notes
#recessions
#economy
#amj




















# Telling people "stop doing that" (prohibitive voice) makes me anxioius, whereas telling people "here is a new way of doing things" (proactive voice) leads to pride


Proactivitly offering suggestions to develop new work protocols = promotive voice, which leads to feelings of pride.
Advising other people about undesirable behaviors = prohibitive voice, which leads to anxiety.

Anxiety => interpersonal avoidance between voicer and receiver
Less anxiety => interpersonal interaction between voicer and receiver


"the social aftershocks of voice" welsh, outlaw, netwon, baer


#ob-notes
#amj
#marketing-genius





























# call "customer mistreatment" something entirely different (negative contact with beneficiary) so you can pretend to study a whole new phenomenon


The literature assumes that workers feel satisfied when they know their work is valued by others (beneficiaries). But, we know little about negative contact with beneficiaries. 

Rude contact from beneficiaries leads employees to feel that their actions are worthless (low self worth). 

Employees have to rationalize the rude contact from their beneficiaries. They do this by thinking to themselves, "I incur high personal costs for the good of patients/families/customers."

Low self worth relates to poor job satisfaction.
Self sacrifice and rationalization is related to job sat.

contributions
1. examine negative contact with beneficiaries (most people examine only positive [christopher not true -- think customer mistreatment literature)
2. contribute to meaningful work literature, which usually focuses on self worth only and not rationalization

theory
The principles of relational job design that have informed past research on positive beneficiary contact largely stem from the overarching framework of social information processing theory. This perspective holds that “finding meaning in behavior and in a job environment is an information processing activity,” and that the social context is a primary driver of what and how information gets processed (Salancik & Pfeffer, 1978: 225). Extant research on beneficiary contact has primarily focused on the first tenet of social information processing theory, which deals with information saliency. The information saliency aspect of social information processing holds that cues from one’s social environment influence the perceptions one forms about their work. This is particularly true when the information is related to the value or worth of one’s job. When beneficiaries are a major part of the work itself, beneficiaries represent a salient source of information about the value of one’s work. 
So, the environment gives you signals that you use to form impressions of work. People can use those signals directly (info processing) or reinterpret them to their own means (rationalization). 

"it's not always sunny in relationally rich jobs" (nielsen & colbert)


#ob-notes
#academese
#terrible-but-great-intro
#mimic-but-terrible-intro
#marketing-genius
#amj































# cool writing on strategy view of performance feedback theory and attribution theory

(a) performance feedback and learning (argote, cyert &  March)

Performance feedback theory suggests that learning from performance feedback is a four- step process: (1) performance evaluation, (2) attribution, (3) search, and (4) risk-taking and change (Cyert & March, 1963; Greve, 2003b; Posen et al., 2018; c.f., Jordan & Audia, 2012).

In the first step, managers evaluate performance. Due to the bounded rationality and the complexity of performance assessment (Cyert & March, 1963; Obloj & Sengul, 2020; Zollo, 2009), they simplify performance evaluation by dichotomizing past performance into success and failure by comparing it with the aspiration level (Cyert & March, 1963). Performance that falls short of the aspiration level is considered a failure, while performance that exceeds it is considered a success. In the second step, managers seek to identify factors deemed to have contributed to the success or failure. Based on the outcome of this attribution, they build or update the causal model specifying the causes of the success or failure, which they then use to make future decisions in the following steps. The strategies and actions associated with success will be reinforced, while those associated with failure will be scrutinized.

In the third step, different types of organizational search are triggered depending on whether a firm experienced success or failure. When a firm experiences failure, managers engage in a problemistic search to find alternatives to strategies and actions thought to have caused the failure, and they become more willing to take greater risks—opening a path to the fourth step of organizational change. Success may also lead to organizational change through an accumulation of a firm’s slack resources, which may promote slack search (c.f., Xu, Zhou, & Du, 2019).


(b) attribution theory

Diffusion of responsibility -- people do not feel responsible for bad performance if control = low. 

When individuals believe they have little control over outcomes, they feel less responsible for the outcomes and are more likely to attribute negative outcomes to external causes (Weiner, 1979; 1986). When a task is performed by several individuals, each individual's control over the outcome of the task decreases and responsibility can be diffused across several individuals; hence, each individual will feel less responsible for the outcome (Beyer et al., 2017; Forsyth, Zyzniewski, & Giammanco, 2002; Mynatt & Sherman, 1975). This heuristic is activated when a task fails, as individuals may attempt to diffuse their responsibility for the failure to others. The larger the number of individuals involved in a task, the more broadly the responsibility can be diffused, and the less likely that each individual will feel accountable for the failure of the task, setting the stage for external attribution (Forsyth et al., 2002). Thus, the diffusion of responsibility amplifies individuals' tendency to attribute failure to others.

Managers may be predisposed to attribute success to themselves and their firm regardless of the number of partners in an alliance. As the number of partners in an alliance increases, however, their perceived control over outcomes decreases, and it becomes more difficult for them to claim a larger share of the credit for a successful alliance because the success is a culmination of joint efforts of all the partners and each partner may vie for more credit and recognition for the success (Ariño & Doz, 2000). Supporting these arguments, prior studies in attribution theory have found that, as the number of partners for a joint project increases, individuals are more likely to make a self-serving attribution for failure, but not for success (Beyer et al., 2017; Mynatt & Sherman, 1975), and they are more likely to fairly acknowledge others' contributions to the success of the project (e.g., Forsyth et al., 2002).

Perceived capability of others -- if someone is highly capable, you reduce tendency to attribute failure to him/her

The perceived capability of self and others is an important factor for attribution in performance assessment in both attribution (Weiner, 1979; 1986) and management research (Rhee, 2009). In particular, the perceived capability of others in a joint task significantly influences how individuals assess and attribute the outcomes of the task (Silvia & Duval, 2001; Strube & Berry, 1985). Building on and extending these arguments, we posit that highly capable alliance partners will reduce managers' tendency to attribute a failed alliance to their partners. When evaluating the outcomes of a complex event such as an alliance, it is difficult for a firm's managers to methodically measure each partner firm's actual contributions (Zollo,2009) Thus, their perceptions of the partner firms' capabilities will be instrumental in estimating the contribution of each partner (Simcoe & Waguespack, 2011). Managers' perception of other firms' capabilities for a task is often determined by the amount of experience they have with the same or similar tasks (Eggers & Kaplan, 2013). Organizational learning research has recognized experience as a primary source of acquiring and enhancing capabilities, suggesting that a firm's level of experience is positively related to its performance (Argote, 2013). Studies on alliances have similarly reported that a firm's alliance experience is positively related to its alliance capability (see Wang & Rajagopalan, 2015 for a review).

Ambiguity of Performance Information

Managers may exploit greater information ambiguity to portray poor performance in a positive light. 

The consistency of performance over time contains crucial information for evaluating and attributing current performance and has been recognized as an important factor in attribution (Meyer, 1980; Weiner, 1979; 1986). Consistent prior performance allows firms to clearly identify a common pattern and make accurate causal attributions of their performance. By contrast, inconsistent prior performance complicates the process of identifying a common pattern and drawing unambiguous lessons, increasing the difficulty of making accurate causal attributions (Arrfelt, Wiseman, & Hult, 2013). We posit that the ambiguity arising from inconsistent prior alliance performance will, not only obscure managers'
" ability to learn from performance feedback, but will also amplify their tendency to make self-serving attributions. Low variability1 in alliance performance allows managers to forecast their future alliance performance more accurately, which in turn helps them make more informed decisions on which governance mode to choose next time. It also limits their tendency to make self-serving attributions when they experience alliance performance that falls short of their aspiration. Low variability in alliance performance reduces ambiguity and noise in performance feedback and provides a consistent pattern of action - outcome relationships that allow managers to more clearly identify the cause of the failure (Dahl & Ransom, 1999; Felon, 1981; Willard & Gramzow, 2008). This causal clarity leaves little room for managers to attribute the failure to their alliance partners or other contingent factors because they cannot "use divergent criteria and draw on disparate types of behavioral evidence" (Dunning et al., 1989: 1082). By contrast, highly variable alliance performance complicates managers' tasks in establishing causal relationships between their actions and the outcomes of past alliances. Highly variable alliance performance indicates that a firm has experienced a wide range of alliance performance levels (both success and failure) and sends mixed signals about its ability to make successful alliances (Kim et al., 2015). Even if its recent alliance performance was unsatisfactory, the fact that it has also experienced successful alliances implies that it is possible to make a successful alliance in the future. In light of the possibility of achieving alliance performance that positively deviates from recent alliance failure, managers may frame the recent failure as an outcome that does not reflect their true capabilities and attribute it to external factors (Gilovich et al., 2002; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). This framing and attribution will not discourage them from making future alliances. Supporting these arguments, attribution research has found that individuals are more likely to make a self-serving attribution for failure when the information pertaining to the failure is ambiguous and contradictory (e.g., Dahl & Ransom, 1999; Dunning et al., 1989; Felon, 1981). Jordan and Audia (2012) pushed this argument further to assert that managers may exploit greater information ambiguity to portray poor firm performance in a positive light-e.g., by manipulating comparison groups and emphasizing the organizational goals that were better met.

The mixed signals from highly variable prior alliance performance may also make managers attribute successful alliances to themselves. Seen from a negative perspective, highly variable prior alliance performance signifies that they have been unable to reliably make successful alliances. Seen from a positive perspective, however, it can be considered evidence that they can make successful alliances in the right conditions. In light of the strong performance in the recent alliance, managers recollect previous successes and draw parallels between recent and past successes. In attributing recent success, they can give more weight to the actions they took in the focal alliance as well as in successful past alliances (e.g., close monitoring and specific contractual agreement) to conclude that such actions led to the success. When individuals have both positive and negative experiences, they tend to rely on positive memories when explaining a recent positive event much more than on negative recollections (e.g., Mayer, McCormick, & Strong, 1995). Thus, when previous alliance performances have been more variable, managers are more likely to make the internal attribution of a successful alliance. In line with these arguments, evidence from attribution research has consistently shown that ambiguous performance- assessment situations facilitate individuals' tendency to make a positive assessment of their achievements (Dahl & Ransom, 1999; Dunning et al., 1989; Felon, 1981; Willard & Gramzow, 2008). 

"the role of attribution in learning from performance feedback" (lee, lee, kim)

#ob-notes
#performance
#feedback
#strategy
#attribution-theory
#amj
#org-learning
#organizational-learning
#performance-ambiguity










# CEO's screw themselves when they give incoherent reasons for firm failure to their shareholders

Following disclosure of financial misconduct, a transgressing firm faces the difficult task of convinc- ing shareholders that it remains worthy of their capi- tal. Fortunately, firms have a few well-documented crisis management tactics they can use to manage shareholders’ evaluations of their trustworthiness; the most-studied and frequently deployed among them being executive dismissal (Gangloff, Connelly, & Shook, 2016; Gomulya & Boeker, 2014) and crisis communication (Bundy, Pfarrer, Short, & Coombs, 2017; Coombs & Holladay, 2004; Elsbach, 2003 Hersel, Helmuth, Zorn, Shropshire, & Ridge, 2019). While most research has examined these tactics inde- pendently to draw conclusions about the utility of each, consider MEMC, Inc.’s crisis management strat- egy after the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) identified a misstatement in its financial reports. Initially, MEMC communicated to its shareholders:
The Company believes that the joint venture’s ac- counting for their functional currency was appropri- ate, and the Company is in the process of working with the SEC staff to resolve this issue.
Then, despite these efforts to minimize any appear- ance of wrongdoing, MEMC unexpectedly announced its chief executive would immediately step down just three weeks later. How do shareholders reconcile inconsistency and illogicality like this within a firm’s crisis management strategy? Existing crisis manage- ment research acknowledges post-transgression com- munication and executive dismissal as central tactics firms can use to rebuild shareholder trust. We posit that firms can send costly mixed messages to share- holders when they fail to utilize these tactics in a coherent manner.

"mixed messsages: crisis communication" (hersel, gangloff, shropshire)

#ob-notes
#financial-misconduct
#strategy
#executive-strategy
#amj


















# people have different amounts and types of things that they find exhausting at work

The authors call this a "configural approach" to the job-demands job-resources model. 

Previously, research examined this theory using a variable centered approach (lots of demands on average is bad). 

They show that different amounts of different demands and resources are highly variable across people. 

GREAT EXPLANATION of JDJR model
demands -> exhaustion
resources -> low exhaustion
resources attenuate the effects of demands

hook / theory / contribution
We know from JDJR: demands produce exhaustion (because they impose psych costs); resources reduce exhaustion (because they motivate employees). We also know that some resources act as moderators on the effects of demands. But results vary. This disconnect between theory and empirical evi- dence about how job demands and resources combine reflects a lack of scholarly consensus around these phenomena, despite increasing recognition that job characteristics have synergistic, not isolated, effects on employee outcomes (Parker, Morgeson, & Johns, 2017). The present research thus aims to build consensus (Hollenbeck, 2008) on how configural effects of job demands and resources may be theorized and tested.


FINDINGS

what is sufficient to produce exhaustion?
- low social support
- high workload and high emotional demands
- high workload and low autonomy

what is sufficient for engagement?
- high autonomy + social support + feedback

Results suggest three configurations—low social support, high workload and emotional demands, and high workload and low autonomy—are sufficient for the presence of exhaustion, while no configurations are consistently sufficient for its absence. Further, only one configuration—high autonomy, social support, and feedback—is sufficient for engagement, and another—low social support and feedback (and autonomy in Study 2)—for its absence.

CHRISTOPHER NOTE
So, it is easier to screw it up (exhaustion) than it is to get it right (engagement). Engagement requires a bunch of stuff. Exhaustion only requires one. 


full intro

Research on employee stress and well-being has increased significantly over the past 20 years (Bliese, Edwards, & Sonnentag, 2017). In particular, the job demands–resources (JDR) model (Demerouti, Bakker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001) has been extensively used to explore the antecedents and mechanisms producing two key outcomes: exhaustion and en- gagement. Conceptually, job demands should show positive associations with exhaustion and negative associations with engagement because job demands require sustained effort and impose physiological or psychological costs. Similarly, job resources should be negatively and positively associated with exhaus- tion and engagement, respectively, because they motivate employees and reduce physiological and psychological costs. Correspondingly, a rich stream of theoretical and empirical research based on the JDR model has provided support for these effects of demands and resources on exhaustion and engage- ment (Bakker & Demerouti, 2007; Crawford, LePine, & Rich, 2010; Van Yperen & Janssen, 2002), and other outcomes related to strain and well-being (e.g., mortality [Gonzalez-Mule & Cockburn, 2017], blood pressure [Ilies, Dimotakis, & De Pater, 2010], patient satisfaction [Reilly, Nyberg, Maltarich, & Weller, 2014]).

Because of the large variety of demands and re- sources experienced by employees, the JDR model has extended beyond examining the main effects of individual demands and resources (additive models) to examine how they combine (multiplicative mod- els). Most notably, the buffering hypothesis suggests that resources buffer the effects of demands on ex- haustion. Associations between demands and ex- haustion should be attenuated in the presence of high levels of resources, and different resources may buffer against different demands (Bakker & Demer- outi, 2017). Although this is a key premise of the model, evidence for such multiplicative buffering effects is inconsistent. Autonomy or control and social support have been found to moderate relation- ships between various demands and exhaustion in some studies (Bakker, Demerouti, & Euwema, 2005; Fox, Dwyer, & Ganster, 1993; Kirmeyer & Dougherty, 1988) but not others (Ganster, Fusilier, & Mayes, 1986; Parker & Sprigg, 1999). Recent meta-analytic reviews have found limited to no buffering effects for a variety of resources on demands (Gonzalez- Mule, Kim, & Ryu, 2020; H€ausser, Mojzisch, Niesel, & Schulz-Hardt, 2010). Autonomy or control and support showed almost no buffering effects, which calls into question whether other resources have buffering effects on demands.

This disconnect between theory and empirical evi- dence about how job demands and resources combine reflects a lack of scholarly consensus around these phenomena, despite increasing recognition that job characteristics have synergistic, not isolated, effects on employee outcomes (Parker, Morgeson, & Johns, 2017). The present research thus aims to build consen- sus (Hollenbeck, 2008) on how configural effects of job demands and resources may be theorized and tested. We depart from traditional variable-centered approaches to the JDR model, which determine the average effects of single demands or resources (Gabriel, Daniels, Diefendorff, & Greguras, 2015). Instead, we adopt a person-centered approach (Gabriel, Camp- bell, Djurdjevic, Johnson, & Rosen, 2018), which involves the “clustering of people as opposed to variables” (Woo, Jebb, Tay, & Parrigon, 2018: 816). Our configural logic explains why extant multiplica- tive models yield inconsistent findings.


"toward a configural theory of job demands" (ong, johnson)


#ob-notes
#amj
#marketing-genius
#intro-mimic
#mimic-intro
#job-demands
#job-resources


















# lay theories (growth vs fixed) implications for whether people engage with dissimilar others

People with fixed mindsets about professional relationships ("professional relationships are like pieces of a puzzle: people either click or they don't") are more likely to avoid dissimilar others (regardless of deep vs surface level characteristics?). 

Results
People with growth theories were more likely than people with fixed theories to report ties to dispositionally dissimilar others.


Growth Theory
Lay theories (also known as implicit theories or mindsets), or beliefs people hold about the mallea- bility of an entity or attribute, have profound conse- quences for how they engage in proactive efforts and respond to difficult situations or relations (Carr et al., 2012; Dweck, 2000; Knee, 1998). For example, stu- dents who believe that intelligence is innate and fixed (fixed theory) are more likely to disengage from schoolwork than those who see intelligence as malleable (growth theory) (Mueller & Dweck, 1998). The reason is simple: effort makes little sense if intel- ligence is fixed and cannot be nurtured. In fact, working hard—and possibly struggling or even failing—may be viewed as a telling sign that one lacks intelligence: people who are naturally smart should not need to study hard. In contrast, students who believe that intelligence can be cultivated are more likely to persist rather than give up in the face of setbacks or challenges (e.g., exams). Hence, hold- ing a fixed theory compels people to avoid difficult situations (because effort—having to try hard— signals a lack of innate ability), whereas holding a growth theory makes people more willing to engage in effortful learning and growth (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Grant & Dweck, 2003; Neel & Shapiro, 2012). Similar effects have been found across a range of domains, including romance (Knee, 1998), negotia- tion (Kray & Haselhuhn, 2007), and leadership (Heslin & Keating, 2017). In addition, lay theories are simple beliefs that are relatively easy to measure as well as manipulate (Paunesku, Walton, Romero, Smith, Yeager, & Dweck, 2015).


For people with a fixed theory, relationships are defined and constrained by a sense of natural compatibility. In this view, people are fixed in their match potential, much like jigsaw puzzle pieces. People can come together, but relationships cannot be forged and molded at will through individual effort. Instead, relationships should form, spontaneously and organically, between people who are natu- rally compatible, and only superficial relations can form between those who are not. People with a fixed theory therefore believe that deliberate efforts to build and maintain ties are futile—a sign that the relationship is perhaps not meant to be (Kuwabara et al., 2018). Instead of cultivating relationships over time, their focus is on finding the right match quickly and rejecting those who are not.

In the growth view, on the other hand, relationships are like muscles that can grow and stretch with care. People can learn to work with each other and become compatible over time—even if they do not click right away—by setting aside their differences, attending to their mutual needs, and committing to each other. In this view, compatibility is a product of proactive effort to accommodate each other. Natural compatibility may be helpful, but it is less consequential than whether people are willing to invest time and effort in building and maintaining relationships.


CHRISTOPHER NOTE
Growth theory for certain things in relationships is fine.
But fixed theory for a few core values is key (freedom of speech and dependable and lighthearted. must have those. fixed theory on those. anything else is growth). 
There was also a big mismatch between theory and method: theory was all about "growth mindset people will put in work over time to develop relationships," but their methods were just single moment correlations or manipulations. 


Writing on diversity and surface vs deep level tensions
A core theme across research on workplace di- versity, including similarity-attraction (Byrne, 1961; Montoya & Horton, 2013), relational demography (Riordan, 2000), team diversity (Williams & O’Reilly, 1998), homophily in networks (McPherson, Smith- Lovin, & Cook, 2001), and cultural fit (Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, & Johnson, 2005), is that interpersonal similarity—whether in demographic or surface-level attributes that are relatively stable and readily re- cognizable (e.g., race, gender, and age), or deep-level attributes in dispositional characteristics, (e.g., values, attitudes, and psychological traits)—promotes mutual trust, identification, and satisfaction, while dissimilar- ity breeds dislike, distrust, and conflict. It is perhaps a truism that communicating and collaborating with people who look different or think differently, com- pared to people with similar attributes, is generally more challenging, fraught with misperceptions and misunderstanding. At the same time, today’s work- place is increasingly heterogeneous, not only in demo- graphics but also in culture and politics, creating a vexing challenge for managers and employees in terms of how to sustain social integration without curtailing diversity, and vice versa.


THE LAY THEORY OF INSTRUMENTAL RELATIONS SCALE
1 5 Strongly disagree, 6 5 Strongly agree. High scores indicate stronger fixed theories.
1. Professional relationships are like pieces of a puzzle: people either click or they don’t, no matter how little or hard they work at it.
2. The basis of any productive relationship is chemistry, like how naturally and effortlessly you get along with a person.
3. How well you click or get along with a coworker is not something you can control or change easily.
4. A relationship between coworkers without chemistry is likely to not work.
5. A productive relationship is probably not meant to be if it does not develop naturally and effortlessly.



"lay theories of instrumental relations" (kuwabara, cao, cho, ingram)


#amj
#ob-notes
#lay-theories
#fixed-growth
#marketing-genius
#growth-theory
#items

















# knowledge diversity in teams is good and bad

If I have a super knowledge diverse team, I can realize its benefits rather than its processes losses using hierarchy/centralized meta knowledge approach. This effect is even more amplified when members believe the status hiearchy is flexible/members have the ability to move up the hierachy.

In other words, diverse teams need a coordinator to avoid process loss. This format, by definition, requires hiearchy, which will trigger perceptions of status (which could be bad). You want members to believe that the status hiearchy is possible for them to navigate.

If members believe that a status hierarchy is impossible to navigate, impossible to move up, then low status members will not contribute. 

BUT, other research (woolley; hays & galisnky) says that people need stable hierarchies ("I know my leader will be the same for the rest of the session") to know who to coordinate with. 

Writing on benefits and drawbacks of knowledge diversity in teams
Knowledge diversity can stimulate information sharing as team members with specialized knowledge offer their perspective and solicit the perspective of others (Kearney, Gebert, & Voelpel, 2009). In diverse teams, members can more readily recognize that others have different perspectives from their own, which can prompt information sharing to broaden the team’s collective understanding of problems (van Knippenberg & Schippers, 2007). With this in mind, many organizations believe in the performance value of knowledge-diverse teams and, as a result, assemble teams in ways that increase knowledge diversity (Aime, Humphrey, DeRue, & Paul, 2014; Guillaume et al., 2017; van Knippenberg & Schippers, 2007).
As noted earlier, however, knowledge diversity may also reduce team information sharing. Several classic group decision-making experiments have found that commonly held information (i.e., homogenous knowl- edge possessed by many team members) is generally shared more often in teams than diverse information that is uniquely held by just one member (Gigone & Hastie, 1993; Stasser, Taylor, & Hanna, 1989; Stasser & Titus, 1985, 1987). Teams can view unique informa- tion as a threat to achieving consensus, since reconcil- ing multiple distinct points of view can be more difficult for teams than focusing the team conversation instead on overlapping information on which mem- bers already agree (Postmes, Spears, & Cihangir, 2001; Stamkou, van Kleef, & Homan, 2019). 

Status Hierarchies in teams can constrict or amplify the effects above
Status differences undermine the relationship between knowledge diversity and information sharing because the team places greater emphasis on the perspectives and contributions of status-advantaged members than on those of status- disadvantaged members (Bunderson, 2003).
However, status differences within a team (e.g., a designated leader or expert) can counteract the tendency for teams to withhold unique knowledge (Aime et al., 2014; Stasser, Stewart, & Wittenbaum, 1995; Stewart & Stasser, 1995; Wittenbaum, 1998). Those at the top of the status hierarchy can use their standing to elicit and then integrate diverse information (Stewart & Stasser, 1995). They thus have the capacity to direct members’ attention to unique pieces of information that might otherwise go overlooked (Wittenbaum, 2000). A status hierarchy can incentivize low- status members to make valuable contributions to the team in an attempt to “move up” (Becker & Huselid, 1992; Lazear & Rosen, 1981). 

The exception is when the hierarchy is stable: For example, emergency room teams tend to have steep yet fluid hierarchies (Klein, Ziegert, Knight, & Xiao, 2006), whereas other types of teams, such as performing arts teams, often have flat yet stable hierarchies (Harrison & Rouse, 2014). Hierarchy stability limits the ability of knowledge-diverse teams to hold high-status mem- bers accountable for serving the group’s interests. Lower-status members of knowledge- diverse teams will have less incentive to share their unique perspectives when the hierarchy is more sta- ble. 


"leveraging knowledge diversity in hierarchically differentiated teams" (gray, bunderson, ban der vegt)


CHRISTOPHER NOTE
Stable hierarchies promote cooperation because others can understand or anticipate the thoughts and actions of others (Woolley et al., 2023) [the leader on this team will be the same for the duration of this project], BUT, member beliefs about "I can gain status in this group" need to entail growth/instability because it allows low status members the courage to speak up. 

In other words, unstable membership roles (rotating leaders / coordinators / roles) makes people confused / cooperative behaviors hard / coordinating behaviors difficult. But, you want "instability beliefs" in how people perceive the status hierarchy. You want people to believe two things, "the command structure will be stable for the upcoming task" AND "generally, I will be able to move up in this field."
- stable hierarchy is important for roles (not for status)
- stability is important for duration of project
- unstable is important for global views of gaining status in the field
- short term vs long term
- roles on this team vs status in the field
- this team vs the field generally
+ status in this team vs status in the field
+ status (I have influence) vs role (I am the leader)
+ stable vs unstable 
+ duration of this project vs the field itself



your leader will be the same throughout the rest of the session



#amj
#ob-notes
#hierarchy
#knowledge-diversity
#christopher-thinking




























# Mentors believe that knowledge flows in one direction, from mentor to mentee

Although most individuals agree that mentoring is an important activity, many potential mentors are unengaged because they see it as a costly obligation (Ragins & Scandura, 1999). We proposed and found that, when mentors adopt a downward learning direc- tion, or the belief that individuals below them in posi- tional power are valuable sources of their learning, they become more effective mentors, both objectively and subjectively. A downward learning direction transformed mentoring from a costly obligation into a learning opportunity.

hook
Mentoring is important. Many employees feel they don't get mentored enough. 
Growing research on barries mentees face when seeking mentor help.
We suggest another reason: that mentors who have the capacity to help do not always do so. 
Introduce a new construct: learning direction.

theory
connect research on learning orientation, mentoring, and social hierarchy

contributions
1. Contribute to mentorship literature by highlighting a new barrier (beliefs about knowledge cascades)
2. extend theory by introducing learning direction as a new construct (belief about which individuals in a hierarchy hold valuable knowledge)
3. we demonstrate that one's learning direction is malleable and open to intervention. Beliefs about learning direction can be realigned. 

“learning direction,” defined as the beliefs people have about which individuals within a hierarchy are valuable sources of knowledge and learning.

A downward learning di- rection represents the belief that individuals lower in positional power are valuable sources of knowledge. In contrast, a lateral learning direction is the belief that individuals with equivalent positional power are valu- able sources of knowledge, and an upward learning direction is the belief that individuals higher in posi- tional power are valuable sources of knowledge.


We propose that downward learning-directed in- dividuals will approach mentorship with a different mindset: rather than seeing mentorship as a burden- some obligation on their time, they will be more likely to approach interactions with potential men- tees as a worthwhile activity full of learning oppor- tunities. By being open to learning from individuals lower in positional power, mentors will be more likely to view these interactions as a two-way street worth their time and full engagement. 

We propose that seeing mentoring as an opportu- nity for learning will lead mentors to be more fully engaged, perceiving these interactions as a catalyst for their own innovation and job performance (Ragins & Scandura, 1999), and ultimately more effective at enhancing their mentees’ learning outcomes and experience. 

LEARNING DIRECTION SCALE
Throughout our lives, we interact with a wide range of people, some of whom have more power than we do and others who have less power than we do. By power, we mean the ability to control the out- comes and resources of another person or being in a position to evaluate that person. As you think about your interactions with others, to what extent do you agree with the following statements:

To what extent do you agree with the following statements (rated on a scale of 1 5 strongly disagree to 7 5 strongly agree):

Downward learning
1. I learn a lot by interacting with those who have LESS power than I do.
2. I seek out interactions with those who have LESS power than I do so I can learn from them.
3. I look for learning opportunities when talking to those who have LESS power than I do.

Lateral learning
1. I learn a lot by interacting with those who have the SAME amount of power as I do.
2. I seek out interactions with those who have the SAME amount of power as I do to learn from them. 
3. I look for learning opportunities when talking to those who have the SAME amount of power as
I do.

Upward learning
1. I learn a lot by interacting with those who have MORE power than I do.
2. I seek out interactions with those who have MORE power than I do so I can learn from them.
3. I look for learning opportunities when talking to those who have MORE power than I do.



"learning down to train up: mentors are more" (zhang, wang, galinsky)


#ob-notes
#amj
#learning-direction
#mentorship
#mentoring
#hierarchy
#attributions




































































































#
#
#
#
#
# robot studies



robot study summaries
- read about robots taking jobs (threat exposure to robots)  = job insecurity
- interact with robot on task (generic, sterile, routinized) = passion decay
- use of smart tech associated with efficacy and role clarity for low C employees. High C employees find it annoying (the authors claim that high C employees find it threatening and violating to high C role identity). 








# yam, tang, et al "the rise of robots increases job insecurity"

christopher summary
- robot use leads to job insecurity, which leads to bad things
- people don't feel so insecure when they complete self-affirmation intervention


hook argument
- there is a new phenomenon. what are the work-related psychological and behavioral consequences?
- robots are increasingly expected to replace human tasks. Some are optimistic, others are pesimistic. What are the psych and behavioral consequences of robot use at work?
- model: robot use => job insecurity => bad behaviors
- test a possible intervention buffer: self-affirmation

study1 (archival)
- robot density in US work regions correlates positively with activity on job-recruiting sites (more robots ~ more activity on job websites)

study2 (experiment)
- randomly assign online participants to 1 of three conditions (read article about robots in business; read article about robots; read article about culture)
- answer survey about job insecurity
- behavioral measure of job insecurity: "select a topic to answer some questions about" (career, music, online storage, online dating, entertainment). If people selected career, the researchers took that to indicate that the participants were job insecure
- participants in the experimental condition reported and manifested greater job insecurity

study3 (daily surveys)
- morning: positive and negative affect controls
- afternoon: robots at work and job insecurity
- evening: burnout and workplace incivility
- daily robot adoption => insecurity => burnout/incivility

study4 (experiment)
- mturkers randomly assigned to robot exposure (news article on robots in business) vs control (news article)
- self-affirmation writing exercise or control
++ [sense of humor, athletics, social relations, social skills, etc.] Rank these values. Write a couple of sentences about why your top values are important to you.
- job insecurity measures
- robot exposure => job insecurity
- effect diminished when people wrote self-affirmations


theory
- job insecurity: a perceived threat to the continuity and stability of employment
- cognitive appraisal theory: when an individual encounters a self-relevant stimulus, he/she engages in an appraisal process -- a stimulus is cognitively appraised either as congruent or incongruent with one's goals.
- exposure to robots causes people to appraise robots as being incongruent with ones' goals (robots can outperform humans)...this culminates in job insecurity.


#robots-at-work
#mimic-article
#science-of-nothing
#weak-science
#silly-study
#amj-nonsense
#robot-studies






# tang, koopman, elfenbeing, zhang et al "using robots at work during the covid-19 crisis evokes passion decay"

work with robots => passion decay => bad things
- but less so for people high in openness
- passion decay = diminished attachment to work

prior lit says passion decay happens when experiences become...
- routinized, tedious, overly familiar

theory
- authors argue that working with robots is tedious and routinized...robots can't provide personalized experiences to workers. Use of robots means more generic and sterile work experiences. 

hook
- New phenomenon. What are the work consequences with respect to passion?
- Although decision-makers continue augmenting employee jobs with robots, research has lagged in understanding how such pairings affect employees. We build and test a model examining why, and for whom, increased interactions with robots at work may lead to passion decay.


mturk study
- complete business simulation
- three rounds. you provide business consulting to lemonade stand business
- robot condition: AI robot makes recommendations to you 
- control condition: no robot
- post-sim surveys: passion decay, withdrawal, exhaustion
- robot condition participants report more passion decay









# tang, koopman et al. "when conscientious employees meet intelligent machines"

consctientious employees are great when paired with old tech. But with new tech (AI tech that is capable of being orderly and systematic on its own), C employees are redundant. 

use of intelligent machines => role self efficacy => performance
- stronger model for low contientious employees


hook
- enduring consensus in literature: conscientiousness is the most important personality predictor for workplace behavior
- this effect is in part due to the ability of consctientious employees to work with traditional tech. Old tech complements consctientiousness
- new tech (AI, algorithms, robots) is non-complementary with conscietneisouness. This “new generation of technology” processes work tasks in a systematic and orderly manner on its own. So, C employees are redundant. The changing nature of work challenges the notion that C employees work best in roles involving technology. 

theory 
- The central premise of complementarity theory is that people often prefer complementary matches that maintain balance between their own attributes and the attributes of other work entities (e.g., extraverted leaders prefer working with less extra- verted employees [Grant, Gino, & Hofmann, 2011]). This creates a problem for conscientious employees, as modern intelligent machines are similarly “orderly,” “organized,” and “systematic” 
- conscientious employees may find working with intelligent machines to be less beneficial for their understanding of, and ability to exceed, role expectations. These employees should thus experience reduced “role breadth self-efficacy” (a capability to “carry out a broad” range of work tasks
- more orderly employees in particular should feel as if their preferred working style is incompatible with these intelligent machines. These employees approach work in a directive and systematic fashion, and are accustomed to “controlling activities” (Hu & Judge, 2017: 939). As such, they may be unsettled with the ways that intelligent machines autonomously adjust work processes, and feel unclear and uneasy about the decisions made by the intelligent machines, the process that led to those decisions, or the effectiveness of those changes (Brynjolfsson & Mitchell, 2017; Rahwan et al., 2019). Thus, these employees may feel ambiguity about who is ultimately in control of assigned role responsibilities


esm study
- consctientiousness
- daily AI usage ("i used AI to carry out job functions")
- daily role self efficacy
- daily task performance

mturk/prolific
- lemonade stand business simulation (see other study description)
- make recommendations to lemonade stand based on your own thinking or with the help of a "smart" algorithm
- surveys (orderliness, role efficacy)
- performance measure: develop business plan for unrelated vendor. Plans were evaluated independently

Their claims are vastly different from their findings. 

Claim
- smart tech is bad for C employees
- C employees feel insecure and threatened and ambiguous and violated by AI tech that takes over the C employees' orderliness

I read their results as "employees with high C are particularly annoyed with 'smart but nudgy and bothersome' tech."













# yam, tang, lam "working with animals: implications for employees' compassion"


hook
- in many industries, humans work with animals. But this phenomenon is not well-understood. What are the work downstream consequences of working with animals?
- work with animals => compassion/awe => prosocial behavior











# conlon & patel "what jobs comes to mind?"

Students hold widely false beliefs about the connection between majors and careers.

Many more students expect to attain their major’s stereotypical career than actually work in that job: 65% of prospective art majors expect to be artists (only 17% are), 63% of biology majors expect to be doctors (23% are), 42% of communications/journalism majors expect to be writers or journalists (4% are), 62% of psychology majors expect to be counselors (21% are), and so on. In turn, few students expect to work in business or to teach (unless they are pursuing business or education majors), and almost none expects to be non-employed. 

By themselves, of course, these results are consistent with mechanisms other than stereotyping. For instance, they could be driven by students exaggerating their own abilities, overestimating the demand for certain jobs, or selecting fields of study about which they have particularly extreme beliefs.

To distinguish between these possibilities and to test for the role of stereotyping, we designed and administered surveys among first-year students at The Ohio State University (OSU). We find that these students exaggerate stereotypical careers. OSU students exaggerate the share of artists among art majors by 36 percentage points (p.p.) or 211%, of doctors among biology majors by 11 p.p. (48%), of journalists among journalism majors by 43 p.p. (1,100%), of counselors among psychology majors by 22 p.p. (105%), and so on. We show that the magnitude of biases in the OSU data appear sufficient to predict the majority of the aggregate biases in the nationally representative respondents’ career expectations.

#false-beliefs
#christopher-thinking
#great-study
#career-overestimation
#career-stereotypes
#false-link-between-major-and-career
#economics
#













# goals gone wild


1) are the goals too specific?

Narrow goals can blind people to important aspects of a problem. 

Remedy: consider multi-dimensional nature of outcomes


2) is the time horizon appropriate?

Short-term goals may harm long-term performance.

Remedy: be sure that short-term efforts don't hurt long-term outcomes


3) how might goals motivate unethical behavior?

Goals narrow focus and cause employees to rationalize their unethical behavior. 

Remedy: leaders exemplify good behavior, make costs of cheating greater than benefit of cheating, strong oversight.


4) are individuals intrinsically motivated?

Goal setting can harm intrinsic motivation.

Remedy: avoid setting goals for things where intrinsic motivation is already high.




how is what I am doing new?
- relating to turnover
- non-anecdotal
- relating to reduced exploration/creativity

I need more of a BLM-type thing.

Here is a concept. Here are the explanations of this concept. Here is what those explanations assume. 



#pg-goodhart
#pg-blm
#goals-gone-wild
#motivation
#self-regulation














# the underlying threat predictor is appraisal of sender's desire to see me as an autonomous actor


unprompted help
[timing]
- took care of something before you arrived
- as you were working on it
- after you were done with it
[involvement]
- i am working on this thing and the person steps in
- the person did something outside me that keeps pressure off of me
[status of sender]
- boss
- coworker
[tone]
- friendly
- disrespectful


unprompted help dimensions from additional examples
[useful/made things better/hit deadline]
- extent to which help is actually useful. VS. I'm just going to have to cover and change what he/she did.
"she didn't organize in the way that I would have, so I had to reconfigure things anyways."
"My coworker LC was willing to help and made me reach my deadline because of it!"
[taking my opportunity]
"This was helpful but aggravating because as a new hire, I wanted to prove my worth"


"My competence was being questioned..."
"People will question my ability because of this..."



involvement and usefulness and timing. unprompted vs reactive.

what is the real underlying aspect?
This person wants to remove obstacles I'm facing so I can act.
This person wants to remove my ability to act. 


Appraisal of sender's desire

This person wants me to be an actor in the world
This person does not want me to act

->

Self threat




Across all of these dimensions we are capturing in the literature are an endless foray of more specific or less specific characteristics of the action
-> timing
-> prompted or unprompted
-> tone

What really moves the needle on the extent to which someone is threatened by help is their appraisal of the sender's desire to constrict or release my actions.
Does the sender want to...
- increase my actions on the world
- restrict my actions on the world
?
If A, then I am not threatened
If B, then I am threatened



This is my mini theory.
What is your mini theory?



What would we be showing?
Status doesn't matter
Unprompted doesn't matter
Make a scale



Practical implication?
- when considering help, don't think "prompted vs unprompted | timing | status"
think, "am I helping this person become an actor on the world?"
Notice that sometimes not helping might provide this answer. 




#ocb
#ocbs
#helping
#unprompted
#christopher-theory
#christopher-thinking
#research-idea
#next-study
#next-opr
#paper-idea

























# hidden solutions. asking the right question leads you to the solution

For example, consider a question about March Madness, the NCAA basketball playoffs in which sixty-four teams compete in a single-elimination tournament (i.e., after each game, the winner advances to the next round and the loser is eliminated) with the hope of being crowned champion. How many games must be played in total across the tournament? The way most people find the answer is by drawing the full bracket and then counting the number of games. But we can phrase the question differently. How many games are required to eliminate all losers? The answer is now obvious: if you have sixty-four teams playing, then sixty-three teams must lose. So, the way you ask a question will lead you through a particular thought process. Reframing the question did not change the solution, but it did change the speed at which we arrived at the solution. 


#asking-good-questions
#ob
#christopher-thinking
#philosophy





# talk to anyone


(a) Convey a story in one sentence. What happened; how it made you feel; cliff into the story.
I'll tell you about what happened to me the other day. My asshole is still bleeding from this story.
Two years ago I was attacked by a dog and was so frightened I lost my t-shirt.

(b) ask for stories. ask for feelings.

Tell me about the moment [the time you]...
Tell me how...
How does it feel to...
What emotions does X evoke in you...
What do you think most people do not understand about...

(c) general conversation: you want to see and discuss conflict, problem solving, then resolution

How to respond to people's questions.
Conflict, problem solving, resolutuion

(d) responding to people's sentences/speech

[they are talking about thing X]

[personal]
My personal experience with thing X
The emotions thing X evokes in me
What memories you have with X
How your view of X has changed over the years
My philosophy of thing X is
[meta]
Why was that on your mind?
Free associate
[repeat]
So, you were doing X?
[questions to ask them to stick on the topic]
specifics about X
broader context about X
their personal stuff with X


(e) open-ended questions

Not "do you like your parents" but...
How did your relationship with your parents become the way it is?
What did you learn about...
What do you think X has added to your life?



#social-animal












# fundamentals





birthdays
Rory Sept 6, 2017
Bowen Aug 29, 2019
Conroy Jan 12, 2022
Leeanna June 25
Josh Aug 5, 1990
Tim Sept 6, 1966


core insights

# staring ceieling / meaning of life / eric hoffer

To suffer with dignity (nazi camps + education/learning is painful)
[what is success]
[that is my idea of happiness]
[tolstoy: three questions]
[a low but accurate view of one's own nature plus the capacity for wonder at the oddness of life]
[Imitate. Fall into a problem demanded of you by the world. Like napping during the car ride home / 
Embed / 
Union / 
Someone articulates something you've always felt but could not put words to / 
harmony (dancing) / alignment]
Play / tinker / experiment
Dichotomies:
- control / agency
- meaning / future / purpose / pointlessness


# what I know (research)

Learning

Clear writing

Statistical mistakes

Cooperation

Performance/Expertise/Motivation/Satisfaction

Finance

Academia/wokeness

Science & Measurement

Systems Archetypes

Economics
- Marginal Costs / Escalation of commitment
- When prices go up, people do less of things

My images
- snowflake
- shared fate/surrogation/conformity in academia
- darwin combine ideas story


# best humor and conversation and speaking with others

(a) flirt opener

describe. white on top. black on bottom. great combo.
Just wanted to say hi for a second, maybe get your number.
My name is Christopher

(b) misdirect

"clearly used for"

(c) push pull

"staring at that phone. half of me thinks you must be reading a profound article. and the other half of me thinks you have no self control"
"comfortable clothes. You must make up for your uncomfortable personality by wearing comfortable clothes."

(d) goofy

you know a long term side effect of X is..."inability to complete coherent thoughts"
kirk correlation
when I look at you, I get the same feeling as..."when I sit on a cold toilet seat"
you look like/got a face only a mother could love/his version of X is



# say hello to someone on the street


a) outfit, great combo

[dark coat with white shoes]
Hello ma'am, love that outfit. Dark on top. Light white shoes on the bottom. Great combo.

Just wanted to say hi for a second, maybe get your number. How is your day going?

Is that right? A lot of people walking up to you with that outfit?

[if she says, "oh I just threw this on today. Not a big deal. I don't look good."]
Oh my, a girl who is pretty but also modest, it is almost like you were made for me. 
Oh my, are you both pretty and modest...
Although I'm not sure. Part of me thinks you are kind an innocent, and part of me thinks you're the devil. 


clothes look comfortable, super tailored. 
You make up for your discomfort with your personality by wearing as comfortable clothes as possible


b) push pull / tease (never think you don't deserve to speak)

You're a good looking girl, but those are some strange nostrils.
You're a good looking girl, except for those nostrils. Those are a little funny looking. 
Lifeless
Devil
Innocent yet trouble
Fiesty
Shady
Dork
Fussy
Scatter-brained
Nosy
Bosy
Indecisive
Forgetful




# humor & deep conversations

-] Misdirection: "what does my audience expect me to say?" Then say the opposite. Describe, then say unexpected. 

Talk about what you see in front of you. "That thing is clearly used to..." then break what is expected. 
If your mother were here she would die of shame. 
He must hide his forked-tongued red tail in those baggy pants. First she had to spit her gum out. 

He won't be here today. He is doing something very important. Something that will establish entirely new ground for the scientific enterprise. Something that will change the course of history in the next 50 years. He went to walmart to buy a new pair of socks.

-] Feelings

How did you feel when...[regret, love, aspire to, happiest/saddist]
What do you think most people don't understand about X...?


-] Prep stories / All in 3 sentences

I'll tell you about what happened to me the other day. My asshole is still bleeding from this story.
Two years ago I was attacked by a dog and was so frightened I lost my t-shirt...

-] Push pull

Lifeless eyes
Half of me thinks you are kind and peaceful, and half of me thinks you spent a lot of time doing... let's say devious things. 

-] Warned...one of whom was a dog

Listen, I was warned by two people about this...one of whom was a dog.

-] Look at you, same feeling as

When I look at you, I get the same feeling as when I sit down on a cold toilet seat.


# Humor

00) no time for drake (key and peele)

State word ("hat")
Find a word that rhymes ("cat")
Add, "I can't be concerned..."
I can't be concerned with wearing a hat. If I wear a hat it makes me look like my head contains a cat. 

0) buz double meaning/reverse ending & ledderman "if you can't"

Be careful; swing dancing is very dangerous. 
One of my close friends started dancing, before he knew it he was married with two kids.
Very dangerous. 

I heard they are starting to advertise phentonal on the AYG podcast.
If you can't get a sponsorship by monster energy, you go with phentonal. 

She's built like a heroin needle. 

He looks like he could impersonate an orangutang

If there were a law against X you'd be in prison. 


1) he compensates for his X with Y

2) Starts with "f" and ends with "at"

3) his version of X is Y

4) he has the x (body/legs/smile/scent) of ...

5) are you garbage / infer

This guy is garbage. I bet he...

eats hot dogs on two slices of wonder bread
goes skiing with jeans
continued to go to high school football games after graduating

From his posture and gait, he is either depressed or constipated.
If he is here, who is gaurding hades?
Interesting that he is here and not still crushed under that house in munchkinland

6) respond with absurdity & double meanings & defy endings

"What are you thinking about?"

What am I thinking about?
- I'm pondering the question, how many chickens would it take to kill a crocodile?
- If I'm waiting for the waiter, does that make me the waiter?

"How many people work at your office?"

About a third of them. 

7) preface with profound phrase

[Do you know why?]
[You know what I've learned in my life? I've learned many lessons, but the greatest lesson I've learned is...]
[Let it be known]


8) golf guys

You seem like someone who has a lot of expensive but unappealing artwork in your home
You look like you teach classes on UFOs in Texas
This guy was told in high school, "you can't raise mynx as pets" and he responded, "challenge accepted."
You look like you could impersonate an orangutang.
you look like your middle name is run of the mill
you look like the amount on your taco bell receipts is more than your rent
You've got the face only a mother could love
WHEN I LOOK AT YOU, I GET THE SAME FEELING AS WHEN I SIT DOWN ON A COLD TOILET SEAT.



# social animal

Two things that girls are always doing

calling for attention
afraid about rejection

If insecurity was illegal, you would be in jail. 


acufv
- approach
- change
- unique
- frustruage
- value

+ Girl sitting on a bench with a book
bad
Hey I just wanted to say I think you're cute.
Do you like to read?
good
Some light reading on a Sunday. I'd be interested to hear why you decided to read that particular book today and not something else. 
I like you're outfit combo by the way, the shoes match your shirt.
+ Girl sitting and waiting for her friend to get coffee
bad
Hey I just wanted to say you are really pretty.
Have you gotten Cofe Loca before?
good
Those socks are unique; couldn't take my eye off of them. 
So what made you decide on Cofe Loca for coffee today as opposed to another spot?




# what do I want to spend my time doing?

with friends & family
- cards
- fire

on own
- piano
- dancing
- reading




#fundamentals
#social-animal
#philosophy
#staring-ceiling





























# humor







# humor


[humor]
The only way this car is worth $500 is if there is a $400 hooker sitting in it.


You're from XX?
I was unaware that we had rodeo clowns in Ramsey county. 


I thought him slow-witted myself. 

Why have you been ineffectually pursuing Chris?

I am sorry you have been alluded the winter long by a half wit. 





Let me throw this in your ass and see if you cum in my face
You know i'm figuring it out. I'm going to bed early, exercising, eating well, having sex with my dad again.
Work has been crazy. I'm backed up. So is my ass because of all the cheese
The mouthgaurd does what my upbringing couldn't




God fulfills himself in many ways. 






[humor]
summer in america
send your kids to camp and they come back trans. summer in america
your sister in-law comes home with a baby and a skinny white boyfriend addicted to adderall. summer in america
close down this neighborhood so we can play wiffle ball and neglect our addiction to nicotine. summer in america. 
"Doctors will tell you"
"You had me at X, you lost me at Y."
"Always a tough look when..."
"[phrase or word]. That sounds like..."





#
#
#
#
# humor



[humor]
He looks like he can impersonate an orangutang



[humor]
I've been trying my best even when it is hard. Fitting a round peg into a square [pause], whatever.



[humor]
On facebook, they implemented this new effect where you can see friends of my friends, potential people I might be interested in. I think it's great, I think it is great for a small company like Facebook to impliment this policy.



[humor]
[somebody says something...]
that sounds like my brother's bachelor party...
that sounds like my first relationship
that sounds like my parents




[humor]
I think I saw that on Brazzers once




[humor]
And the two of us sat there together and spoke until 3am, in a hotel lobby.
And then he took the back of my head and pushed it down...
no i'm kidding ha = ]



[humor]
The man has produced a countless number of my favorite films, including
X
...and
...well, and others


California is a misleading dating profile. Not a straight up catfish. But where you go "oh god." Like where you see the person at the table [you know this feeling] as you walk in and your first response is, "i hope to god this isn't what it is." But you know deep down that it is. And you have to sit and eat with them.


[humor]
i hope you brought a napkin because they just spit in your face








#social-animal
#humor
















# positive humor




Do you have a navigation app on your phone? Because I'm getting lost in your eyes


I know you work here. I was just wondering...is one of the requirements to work here...being beautiful


Hey brother can you do me a favor? Can you leave some women for the rest of us?


Hello. I was just wondering if you and I could sit in awkward silence. 


Excuse me sir...what is the best part of being rich?
Excuse me sir...what is it like to have fuck you money. 
Excuse me sir...I just wanted to tell you that you look annoyingly attractive
Excuse me sir...is it hard being so attractive?


Excuse me miss I think you dropped something back there. It was your crown because you are a queen. 


Do you by any chance work at UPS. You look like you have...the total package. 




LAUGH. HAVE A GOOD DAY. 






is a requirement to work here being beautiful?
Could you do me a favor? Could you leave some women for the rest of us?
do you have a side-job at UPS. because you are the total package.
do you have a side-job at google. because you have everything I'm looking for. 
You guys look like a beautiful couple I was just wondering. What's it like to date such a stud?
Excuse me miss...what is it like to date such a stud?
I wish I was cross eyed so I could see you twice. 

[with dog or ice cream or food]
Delicious! Cute!
No no, I was talking about you!

[what is it like?]

[as people walk by on a cross walk]
I think you dropped something back there. Your crown because you are a queen

["I read a study" describe them]
I read a study that said dudes that drive white cars love to party. Is that right?




#humor
#social-animal




































#
# approach

[summary]
How did this come together?
Astrology read
Innocent yet trouble
Kirk fox correlation (you do know that there were more murders when...)
You need your own Netflix show (how do die alone with no retirement savings)


Hi. Have to say I that outfit is intriguing. How did this come together? You look bad ass right now. What is your story?

That outfit makes it seem like you are not boring. Not sure if I'll love or hate you, but I'm intrigued so far. 


Well I have to say you have an innocent face but this outfit makes you look like trouble. 



[what do you do? how was your day?]
RESPOND IN A WAY THAT MIMICS ASTROLOGY READING
Oh alright. So you're like a creative person?


#
# push pull

Sort of like tease and then compliment. 

"You're cute but i bet you're trouble."
"You're cute but I'm not sure we'd get along."


[describe her] + [small tease]
"Love those unique socks...but I wonder if you're crazy"


"I thought I loved you until you said that..."
"You know what I love about you? Absolutely nothing."

"It's so annoying how cute you are."

"So awesome that you [positive]...I tend to get head over heels for girls that [negative]..."





#
# good teases

trouble
fiesty
shady
dork




#
# qualifying statements

"You seem like you have a lot of friends. What makes you so popular?"

"Seems like you're outfit is very put together. What makes you the fashion expert?"

"I bet you're the kind of girl who gets what she wants, regardless of what other people say."

"Don't tell me you believe in astrology. You're too smart for that."













#
#
#
# opener:

Flirting opener:

"This is a great combination. All black with the light hair on top. Well done." 




# social animal

creatives
- I want to make something that I know others will enjoy
- why can't I do that for dating?



What does that mean to you?



date questions
- how do you remember what you read? how do you decide what to read?



#
#
#
#
#
# social animal


I hope you know I've been watching Youtube videos on how to rub your feet good
I'd be so good to ya
You give me a moment and I'll make it last a lifetime


#social-animal




































# academese to businessese

Change language from CV to business resume
See images/Academese-to-Business-Translator.docx

#clear-writing
#bad-writing
#business-writing
#academese
#businesses
#academic-to-business-writing
















# Breda & Napp, 2020 “Girls’ comparative advantage in reading…”

Why aren’t more girls in math?

Both boys and girls who are super good at math are interested in math careers.
- BUT

Boys who are super good at READING are interested in math careers, whereas girls who are super good at reading are not at all interested in math.

Policy impications
- don’t make children specialize so early
- better inform people of the economic returns to come in various fields




#gender-careers








# ai most effective for low skilled employees

https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w30612/w30612.pdf

AI most effective for low skill taxi drivers
Just like what we found at ASIST: AI most effective for low-(team potential) teams

#ai
#asist
#darpa
#low-skill
#economics









# culture dimensions

the hidden challenge of cross-border negotiations

see 'culture-characteristics.pdf' in zotero

hofstede's culture dimensions
distribution of power
tolerance for uncertainty
individualism vs collectivism
harmony vs assertiveness

hall's "silent language"
relationships (is the culture deal-focused or relationship-focused)
communication (nonverbal cues important? precise and to-the-point, or lots of info?)
time (punctuality or flexibility?)
space (how much personal space?)

#culture
#hofstede-culture












# sex differences in cognitive ability

Men score higher on tests of mental visual rotation
images/sex-differences-cog-ability.jpg

This is one of the most well-replicated findings ever.
IT IS NOT a function of different socialization for boys and girls. The water test proves this: boys and girls are not differentially exposed to water cups throughout childhood, yet boys score way higher on this test. 

#intelligence
#sex-differences
#anti-woke
#visual-ability
#cog-ability
#charles-murray














# Language as an adaptive system 
Andy clark
University of Edinburgh

The iterated-learning explanation of structured language is one of those beautiful explanations that turns things on their head, exposing their workings and origins in a brand new way. It suggests powerful alternatives to views that depict human brains as heavily adapted to the learning of humanlike languages. Instead, it depicts humanlike languages as heavily adapted to the shape of the learning devices housed in human brains. 

The core idea is that language is itself a kind of adaptive system that laters its forms and structures so as to become increasingly easily learnable by the host agents (us). This general idea first appears (as far as I am aware) in Terry Deacon's 1997 book, The Symbolic Species. It has been pursued in depth by computationally minded linguists such as Simon Kirby, Morten Christiansen, and others. Much of that work involved computer simulations, but in 2008 Kirby et al. published a paper in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences augmenting those proofs in principle with a laboratory demonstration using human subjects. 

In these experiments, subjects were taught a simple artificial language made up of string/meaning pairs, and then tested on that language. Some of the test items were meanings that had featured in training, while others were new meanings. Then comes the trick. A "new generation" of subjects is then trained, not using the original items but the data from the previous generation. The language is thus forced through a kind of generational bottleneck, such that one generation's choices (including errors and alterations) provide the next generation's data. What the experimenters robustly found (echoing the earlier simulation results) was that languages subject to this kind of cumulative cultural evolution became increasingly easy to learn, exhibiting growing regularities of construction and inflection. This is because the languages alter and morph in ways that are a better and better fit with the basic biases of the subjects (the hosts). In other words, the languages adapt to become easier to learn by the kinds of agents that are there to learn them. They do this because learners' expectations and biases affect both how well they recall actual training items and how they behave when presented with novel ones. 

Language thus behaves a bit like an organism adapting to an environmental niche. We are that niche. 


[christopher writing about proceedings experiments]
learn image-letter pairings
then tested: show participant image, have the participant enter text
use the results of participant i as the learning material for participant i+1
result
- errors decrease over time
- language becomes more structured (stable pairings between 1 letter and 1 meaning)


#edge-explanation
#edge-theory
#edge-writing
#edge
#cultural-language-evolution
#language-adaptive-system
#explanation















# tyler cowen on hiring

Reduce the number of interviewers in your process. If you have more than four or five interviewers, chances are that the costs associated with the additional complexity in your process have exceeded the benefits they produce.

Be explicit about whose decision it is. Steer your organizational culture away from a consensus-oriented approach. Instead, for each role make it explicit whose decision it is, who else might have veto power, and that other interviewers should not be offended if a candidate is hired despite not getting their approval. And then keep repeating this message until most of your colleagues adapt to this new approach.

Ask interviewers to use numerical ratings when evaluating candidates. We’ve experienced that doing so helps hiring committees focus on the holistic view rather than on one-off negative comments. Having interviewers submit their ratings before getting input from their colleagues will have the further benefit of reducing the chance of groupthink in your evaluations.

Remove the “Dr. Deaths” from your hiring committee. Track which interviewers turn down the most candidates, and if they are not better at picking good hires, communicate with them that they will be removed from the hiring committee if they don’t correct their behavior.

Change your culture to reward those who spot great hires, not penalizing those who end up with an occasional poor performer. You can further do this by emphasizing the difference between good decisions and good outcomes. Sometimes a fully logical bet will result in a poor outcome. If needs be, call out those spreading negativism.

[christopher note]
Notice that he talks about 'what to do with people who are making hiring decisions' rather than 'what to do about the interviewees.'

#hiring
#selection
#talent
#marginal-revolution





# how to write a harvard business review article

https://hbr.org/2019/08/how-to-avoid-groupthink-when-hiring

Take something we already know and act like you are placing your own spin on it.
Take something IO psych knows well and spin up a little problem/story to it for HBR. 


Same with Melissa Valentine "justice equilazability" that was truly just shared fate.
Same with tyler cowen talent book. 

ps, do the same with coleman hughes for quilette

#how-to-write-harvard-business-review
#mimic-for-harvard-business-review
#mimic-for-lay-audience






# what to ask in interviews


images/people-analytics-interview.png



#people-analytics-interviews
#realistic-job-preview















# mainstream narratives are wrong | never forget | pessimistic view of it all



Covid starts and the government shuts down business. Small business owners in Michigan protested at the Capital. We need our businesses open or we can't eat. "Let us take the risk of staying open, if it is what we desire." As that happened, all of my liberal dancer friends posted mocking cartoons on social media. These protestors are maskless, spreading the disease, and complaining, they said. They were belitting the small-town, business-owner protests.

Then the george floyd situation happens. Then BLM happens. Then riots and protests begin, but this time having to do with race.

Those same liberal dancers not only posted positive messaging about the BLM protests, they joined. 

2020-2022, media, politics, negativity

Media lies about
- covid
- racism
- jussie smollet
- kyle rittenhouse
- lab leak theory
- hunter biden laptop
- ukraine and russia war
- johnny depp and amber heard


On top of OB vs IO psych publishing
On top of last year at Michigan State


#christopher-thinking
#when-my-pessimism-began
#negativity-everywhere
#media-lies
#cowen-grand










# The mechanism of mediocrity
Nicholas G Carr

In 1969, a Canadian-born educator named Laurence J. Peter pricked the maidenhead of American capitalism. "In a hierarchy," he stated, "every employee tends to rise to his level of incompetence." He called it the Peter Principle, and it appeared in a book of the same name. The little volume, not even 180 pages long, went on to become the year's top seller, with some 200,000 copies going out bookstore doors. It's not hard to see why. Not only did the Peter Principle confirm what everyone suspected -- bosses are dolts -- but it explained why this had to be so. When a person excels at the job, he gets promoted. And he keeps getting promoted until he attains a job that he's not very good at. Then the promotions stop. He has found his level of incompetence. And there he stays, interminably. 

It wasn't long before scientists developed the "Generalized Peter Principle," which went thus: in evolution, systems tend to develop up to the limit of their adaptive competence. 

#peter-principle
#edge
#explanation
#edge-explanation





# Tinbergen's questions

Nikolaas Tinbergen did not try to provide a global explanation but instead gave us a scaffolding upon which to build our own answers to behaviors we observe.

Succinctly, Tinbergen asked:

What is the mechanism? How does it seem to work?
What is the ontogeny? How do we observe it develop over time?
What is its function? What are all the possible reasons it is done?
What is its origin? What are the many ways in which it could have arisen?

In attempting to answer each of these questions, we are forced to think, at the very least, about the interplay of genes and environment, of underlying processes at different levels, of triggers and timing, what advantages and disadvantages are balanced, and how these may have changed over time. 

#edge
#tinbergen-questions
#explanation




# The beautiful law of unintended consequences

Robert Kurzban

According to the guide of my walking tour of The Rocks neighborhood in Sydney, Australia, when the plague hit the city around 1900 a bounty was placed on rats to encourage people to kill them, since it was known that rats bore the fleas that communicated the disease to humans. The intent of the bounty was plain enough: reducing the number of rats to reduce the spread of the plague. An unintended consequence, however, was that residents, tempted by the rat bounty, began breeding rats. 

The law of unintended consequences is often associated with the American sociologist Robert Merton, though its general spirit appears in various forms. The idea is that when people intervene in systems with a lot of moving parts -- especially ecologies and economies -- the intervention, because of the complex interrelationships among the system's parts, will have effects beyond those intended, including many that were unforeseen and unforeseeable. 


#edge
#goodharts-law




# Implications of ivan pavlov's great discovery

Robin Rosenberg

As part of his nobel prize winning research on digestion, Ivan Pavlov measured the amount of saliva produced when dogs were given food. In the course of this work, he and his colleagues noticed something unexpected: the dogs began salivating well before they were fed. In fact, they salivated when they first heard the approaching footsteps of the person coming to feed them. That core discovery led to the discovery of classical conditioning. 

The key idea behind classical conditioning is that a neutral stimulus (sound of approaching footsteps) comes to be associated with a stimulus (food) that reflexively produces a response (salivation). After a while, the neutral stimulus elicits the response naturally. 

This simple process gives rise to a host of elegant and nonintuitive explanations. 

For example, consider accidental deaths from drug overdoses. In general, narcotics users tend to take the drug in a specific setting, such as their bathroom. The setting initially is a neutral stimulus, but after someone takes narcotics a few times, the bathroom comes to function as a conditioned stimulus: as soon as the user enters the bathroom with narcotics, the user's body responds to the setting by preparing for ingestion of the drug. To get a sufficient high, the user must now take enough of the narcotic to overcome the body's preparation. But if the user takes the drug in a different setting, perhaps at a party, the CR does not occur -- that is, the usual physiological preparation for the narcotic does not take place. Thus, the usual amount of the drug functions as if it were a larger dose and may be more than the user can tolerate without the body's pre-emptive readiness. Thus, classical conditioning explains why drug overdoses sometimes accidentally occur when usual doses are taken in new settings. 

By the same token, classical conditioning plays a role in the placebo effect: the analgesics regularly used by many of us, such as ibuprofen or aspirin, begin to take effect well before their active ingredients have time to kick in. Why? From previous experience, the mere act of taking that particular pill has become a conditioned stimulus, which triggers the pain-relieving processes invoked by the medicine itself. 


#edge
#explanation
#classical-conditioning




# Developmental timing explains the woes of adolescence

Alison Gopnik

(a) cool discovery about motivation

Recent studies show that adolescents aren't reckless because they underestimate risks but because they overestimate rewards, especially social rewards -- or, rather, that they find rewards more rewarding than adults do.

Think about the incomparable intensity of first love, the never-to-be-recaptured glory of the high-school basketball championship. 

In youth you want things, and then in middle age you want to want them. 



(b) developmental explanation

The idea is that there are two different neural and functional systems that interact to turn children into adults. The developmental relationship between those two systems has changed, and that, in turn, has profoundly changed adolescence.

First, there is a motivational and emotional system that's very closely linked to the biological and chemical changes of puberty. This is what turns placid ten-year-olds, safe in the protected immaturity of childhood, into restless, exuberant, emotionally intense teenagers, desperate to attain every goal, fulfill every desire, and experience every sensation. And for adolescents, the most important goal of all is to get the respect of your peers. 

The second system is a control system that can channel and harness all that seething energy. The prefrontal cortex reaches out to guide and control other parts of the brain. This is the system that inhibits impulses and guides decision making. This control system depends much more on learning than does the motivational system. You get to make better decisions by making not-so-good decisions and then correcting them. You get to be a good planner by making plans, implementing them, and seeing the results again and again. Expertise comes with experience. 

In the distant evolutionary past, these two systems were in sync. Most childhood education involved formal and informal apprenticeships. Children had lots of chances to practice exactly the skills they would need to accomplish their goals as adults and so to become expert planners and actors (so, system 1 and system 2 unfolded simultaneously). To become a good gatherer or hunter, cook or caregiver, you would actually practice gathering, hunting, cooking, and taking care of children all through middle childhood and early adolescents -- tuning up the prefrontal wiring you'd need as an adult. When the motivational juice of puberty kicked in, you'd be ready to go after the real rewards with new intensity and exuberance, but you'd also have the skill and control to do it effectively and reasonably safely.

In contemporary life, the relationship between these two systems has changed. For reasons that are somewhat mysterious but most likely biological, puberty is kicking in at an earlier and earlier age (the leading theory points to changes in energy balance as children eat more and move less). The motivational system kicks in with it. At the same time, contemporary children have very little experience with the kinds of tasks they'll have to perform as grown-ups. Children have less and less chance even to practice such basic skills as cooking and caregiving. In fact, contemporary adolescents and pre-adolescents often don't do much of anything except go to school. The experience of trying to achieve a real goal in real time in the real world is increasingly delayed, and the development of the control system depends on just those experiences. 

This doesn't mean that adolescents are stupider than they used to be; in many ways, they're much smarter. In fact, there's some evidence that delayed frontal development is correlated with higher IQ. The increasing emphasis on schooling means that children know more subjects than they ever did in the days of apprenticeships. Becoming a really expert cook doesn't tell you about the evolution of tool use or the composition of sodium chloride -- the sorts of things you learn in school. But there are different ways of being smart; knowing history and chemistry is no help with a souffle. Wide-ranging, flexible, broad-based learning may hinder the development of finely honed, controlled, focused expertise in a particular skill.

This explanation elegantly accounts for the paradoxes and problems of our particular crop of adolescents. 

There do seem to be many young adults who are enormously smart and knowledgeable but directionless, who are enthusiastic and exuberant but unable to commit to a particular work or a particular love until well into their twenties or thirties. And there is the graver case of children faced with the uncompromising reality of the drive for sex, power, and respect, without the expertise and impulse control it takes to ward off pregnancy or violence. 




#edge
#developmental-psychology
#explanation




# The precession of the simulcra

Douglas Rushkoff

I found French sociologist and philosopher Jean Baudrillard's "precession of the simulacra" to be an immensely valuable way of understanding just how disconnected from anything to do with reality we can become.

The main idea is that there's the real world, there's the maps we use to describe that world, and then there's all this other activity that occurs on the map -- sometimes with little regard for the territory it's supposed to represent. There's the real world, there's the representation of the world, and there's the mistaking of this simulation for reality. 

The levels can keep building on one another, bringing people to further abstraction and disconnection from the real world. Land becomes territory; territory then becomes property that is owned. Property itself can be represented by a deed, and the deed can be mortgaged. The mortgage is itself an investment that can be bet against with a derivative, which can be secured with a credit default swap. 

A credit-default-swap crisis can bankrupt a nation as big as the United States without changing anything about the real land it refers to. 

The last disconnection is the important one -- the sad one, in many respects. Because that's the moment we forget where things come from -- when we forget what they represent. The simulation is put forth as reality. The invented landscape is naturalized and then mistaken for nature. 

And that is when we become particularly vulnerable to illusion, abuse, and fantasy. Because once we are living in a world of created symbols and simulations, whoever has control of the map has control of our reality.

#edge
#explanation
#data-generating-process
#goodharts-law







































# heather macdonald diversity delusion



Heather Mac Donald

School is about passing on an inheritance




able to think abstractly. Extrapolate from current situation to derive a principle from that. 

Most undergrads just yell out on a current event because of an immediate, superficial, unthought reference to something they think will make them sound "in the club." They don't think about how what they are referring to can be abstracted into a principle, and when that principle is applied to someone else they don't like it. 




The vicious cycle between mismatching and teaching students to be victims
- low-quality black students allowed into MIT due to affirmative action
- those students are taught that they are victims
- they perform lower in class due to their low-quality
- they blame racism. they shout and scream and demand
- the administrators, in their efforts to quell the shouts of racism, implement more affirmative action



University of California San Diego creates a new administrative diversity position. 

This position is in addition to all of the following already existing positions:

The Chancelor's Diversity Office
The associate vice chancelor for faculty equity
The assistant vice chancelor for diversity
The faculty equity advisor
The graduate diversity coordinator
The staff diversity liason
The undergraduate student diversity liason
The graduate student diversity liason
The chief diversity officer
The director of development for diversity initiatives
The office of academic diversity and equal opportunity
The committee on gender identity and sexual orientation issues
The committee on the status of women
The campus council on climate, culture, and inclusion
The diversity council
The directors of the cross-cultural center
The lesbian-gay-transgender resource center
The women's center


All about identity.

It creates an environment where academic excellence is no longer the center. 

By being there, it encourages these students to identify as victims. 

The system is not biased. By having all of these positions, you make it seem like it is. And you are surrounding the students with ideologs who believe it is. 




Education is about taking you out of yourself. Being female is not interesting, nor is it an accomplish. Same with being black. Don't read for someone who is female. Read for great language. 






#heather-macdonald
#diversity-delusion
#sjw
#woke






















# some textbooks





the economy textbook

https://www.core-econ.org/the-economy/book/text/0-3-contents.html
https://www.google.com/search?q=handbook+of+group+and+organizational+learning&rlz=1C5CHFA_enES571US573&oq=handbook+of+group+and+organizational+learning&aqs=chrome..69i57j0i22i30l2.4842j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8


Measurement in R textbooks


https://www.amazon.com/Basics-Response-Statistics-Behavioral-Sciences-ebook-dp-B073H68BLH/dp/B073H68BLH/ref=mt_other?_encoding=UTF8&me=&qid=

https://www.amazon.com/Handbook-Educational-Measurement-Psychometrics-Chapman-ebook/dp/B07FGGD3GR/ref=reads_cwrtbar_2/146-8173340-0027767?pd_rd_w=2gMz8&pf_rd_p=0285128d-50e0-4388-acba-48a4a1f64720&pf_rd_r=CK00FCQ9VX0N6HNVR9YJ&pd_rd_r=b73aad8e-afa8-446e-a69a-79f13d2963b7&pd_rd_wg=06MMa&pd_rd_i=B07FGGD3GR&psc=1


Other R textbooks

https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00MMOJ3ZA?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_8&storeType=ebooks

https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07M5MH45W?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_36&storeType=ebooks

https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08159DXSP?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_43&storeType=ebooks

https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08HPF3TGV?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_50&storeType=ebooks

https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B08VRSZ8SJ?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_52&storeType=ebooks&asin=B08VRSZ8SJ&revisionId=&format=4&depth=1


#textbooks
#r-textbooks
#economics-textbook
#r-programming-textbook













# tyler cowen

"Economics is less about predicting what will happen and more about giving people frameworks to ask good questions and think through issues thoroughly."

"Game theory did not predict X or Y war, or the outcome of war Z. But it gives you a way of reasoning through what to do in a given situation."









Eliminate arbitrary barriers to advancement




Time horizon
Our country will last forever.
Our country will last for another 100 years.
Policy changes depending on which you believe



Constraints and costs and inovation/crafting/behavior and solve for the equilibrium
- with HR action, are you putting a cost or constraint on people?
- when you enact a policy, people react/behave/innovate/craft

The returns to being ethical are high




Equivalent data, distinct models / data-generating mechanisms
The data:
- wars are becoming less frequent
Pinker: optimism theory
Cowen: pessimism theory: the weapons are getting more advanced and cause more damage. Therefore they can be used less frequently. We will witness a period of time of calmness, followed by the apocolypse.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dP27fJ6Trbg
4:21


He also raises my same racist theory
Around 1:00:00
What explains this weird 1970s thing?
We are an increasingly feminized society
Therefore, we are much less likely to go to war
But people have become more comfortable with beurocracy, with structure, and less risky.  
Women are more risk averse. Cowen: that must really matter for our economy. 
Elite men have gained but non-elite men have lost in the current world. 




Prep vs perform time. And practice vs perform time.
"I spent a month preparing for that podcast. And it was over in an hour."
"That's still better than the Olympics."
Great pianists practice scales all day. They don't perform all day.
My friends in typical jobs perform all day. 






#christopher-thinking
#scientific-reasoning
#purpose-of-models
#phil-of-science
#phil-of-modeling
#tyler-cowen
#cowen-grand
#quote
#podcast










# sentences / quotes

Knowing an author's gonads and melonin gives an ignorant student license to reject the author as repugnant and the material as not worth reading if his gonads and melonin don't match his own is ridiculous


I don't believe that the real median wage has fallen, but the fact that it is even possible to show up as such in the numbers shows you something funny has been going on. 


I was mounted and had the choice of firing off-hand or dismounting to shoot from rest, which would allow Chomsford to augment the distance. 




Douglas Murray
"You can't talk about these things. You are not black."
"I don't buy that kind of argument. You can't talk about the Holocaust. You are not Jewish."
"Moreover, these are also the people who say, 'you must read and read and read and learn about black people."





# nate the lawyer

I like to understand the arguments and the logic, and how people reach certain conclusions. 




# word salad

This woman says so many words - and so few of them significant. She can talk for 3, 4, 5 minutes and convey nothing other some trite observation which could have been made in 30 seconds.  

I personally find her tone intensely annoying - and her huge self-regard entirely misplaced.  She seems to perfectly exemplify the product of a wildly expensive liberal US Education. Lots of words - almost no depth whatsoever.



## cult thinking on 'hearing a contrary opinion causes trauma'

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VXucJx0Ewnc
1:31:00

Viva says (when describing how baurocrats silenced outspoken doctors during covid)

'people are are dying from this disease. No one should have to experience the trauma of listening to a doctor spread mis-information.'

Viva's take:
They are virtue signaling at the medical level and it is killing people. 
A culture around covid has been created where questioning it is murderus discourse. 

[christopher note]
That isn't quite right. It isn't a cult around covid. It is a cult around safety and protection from people who disagree with you. 




These people have no exposure to the disasters of world history. 


This is navel gazing



Think abstractly
extrapolate from a current situation to derive a principle
see how you set a precedent for future situations 





# youtube? or book about live social experiments

Coleman Huges on sitting through two similar courses in college
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsW7q12WJBs
5:45
One class was philosophy taught by feminist
Anotoher was philosophy taught by old school college professor
"I was essentially sitting in an experiment. The material was the same, but the context and style of learning was so much different in each class."

My story with Jared.
My story with MSU ending year craziness. 

Write a book. Get submissions on "story experiments." Have people submit. Two different situations or natural experiments. 




### youtube idea

Nate the lawyer: the news reported X about Amber Heard's trial. You can look up the actual information on the court's website. The court's website said Y. Let me break it down.
- do the same thing about news and study finding
- news said X. Actual study said Y. 







#quote
#podcast
#christopher-thinking
#sjw
#anti-woke
#anti-anti-racism












# ten easy rules for stats

https://twitter.com/TimHarford/status/1372228546404438017?fbclid=IwAR10HhS5lpWJMlvCG_mOsLwQvXF5SkK0pl3p2LJOYC3EXtW06HPCSSpEqfY

#stats
#undergrad-reading
#glm
#christopher-thinking
#statistical-ideas




# high tech and nudges

assumptions I see everywhere:

high tech tools are a source of productivity/coordination/collaboration

if only we have the right mac configuration, if only we use the right nudges, then we can make our overwhelming work effortless. 

systems dynamics: things fluctuate/turbulance is natural. Stop intervening so much.

#christopher-thinking
#research-ideas
#nudges
#systems-dynamics
#explanation
#edge








# de-regulation

Medical-device deregulation promotes innovation and reduces prices, and safety of the devices is not harmed. 

But people in America increasingly favor safety over liberty. It is hard to make the "deregulation" argument without people calling you bad names 
- see the comments


https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/11/fda-deregulation-increases-safety-and-innovation-and-reduces-prices.html

#economics
#de-regulation
#liberty-over-safety
#marginal-revolution
#great-paper
#red-tape
#remove-constraints














# the secrets of successful mediators

Open ended question to mediators
How mediators build rapport in negotiations

I’d like to ask your help on what may turn out to be an interest- ing paper. In recent conversations with experienced mediators, I have frequently asked, “How do you account for your success as a mediator? What skills and techniques do you have that you think enable you to get settlements?” I have found the answers to these questions to be quite interesting and often somewhat different from what one finds in the mediation literature.
That leads me to ask if you’d respond in writing to the above questions . . . I certainly don’t expect a lengthy response, some- where between one paragraph and a page or two would be fine. I would, however, appreciate the most candid response possible, not necessarily what you would say for publication, but what you really view as your essential strength(s) and technique(s).

#study-mimic
#items
#negotiations
#mediators
#open-ended-items
#interview-items








# political correctness scale

christine anne andary-brophy

The Political Correctness Scale, and PCL-S and PCA-S exhibited sound psychometric properties. 

PC was most strongly related to low verbal intelligence, high agreeableness, and extreme sensitivity to perceived cultural topics. 

PC is an egalitarian response triggered by extreme sensitivity, with purposes determined by social political belief. 



#anti-woke
#items
#pc-scale
#polical-correctness-scale







# rachel evans idea

I can only use my brain for three hours. Then I need to use my hands. 

I bet this is true for everyone.

When covid hit, we all became aware of a hidden but obvious fact: you can only do so much cognitive work in one day. 

Just like how certain jobs require physical strength minimums, certain jobs require cognitive demand minimums. You must be able to focus for X amount of hours. Some people can, some people can't. 

So, two things:
- 1: individual differences in ability to focus attention for sustained time and use your brain. We need to do a better job of selecting for this, for making it clear that it exists in the market.
- 2: everyone can only use their brain for so long. We all need periods of the day doing cognitive work and periods of the day doing physical work. 

#christopher-note
#research-idea
#rachel-idea
#motivation
#cognitive-limits
#physical-limits-cognitive-limits
#self-improvement
#performance









# subramani "try, try, try again"

Why are women under-represented in innovation?

One reason is because women tend to give up after early-career rejection.

https://haas.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/Try-try-try-again-Persistence-and-the-Gender-Innovation-Gap.pdf

#persistence
#economics
#marginal-revolution
#motivation
#great-paper
#gender-gap










# u austin reduces red tape

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/11/another-university-of-austin-update.html

In place of large, on-campus administrative bureaucracies, UATX plans to make administration remote, outsourcing positions abroad. 

It also seems there will be no tenure, but low course loads and competitive salaries, with an adjudicative body to assess disputes between administrators and faculty.

#red-tape
#great-paper
#de-regulation
#administration-bloat
#uatx










































# tyler cowen life is messy. it is an accident. it is tragic. there is no grand story.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RoEEDKwzNBw

#tyler-cowen
#life-is-messy
#no-grand-narrative
#suspicious-of-stories




# low IQ (podcast with lex fridman)

knowledge economy, intelligence, people with low cognitive ability
- we need to deal with this
- 16% of the population has an IQ under 85
- if you have an IQ under 85, it is hard to be gainfully employed (with a salary that can keep you above water)
- 16% of the US population is about 50 million people
- 14 million children have an IQ under 85
- is this something we want to ignore?



#low-intelligence
#cognitive-ability
#low-iq






# Money laundering process

Buy a front business (a nail salon or a strip club) that is cash heavy.
Take your dirty money and mix it with the cash coming into your front business.
Use the mixed money from the front business in some way. 
After making it difficult to follow the money trail, withdraw cash and spend it.


#example-of-process
#money-laundering







# tyler cowen on random walks

if we look at the GDP when we run statistical tests...it is hard to distinguish that from a random walk with trend. So there is not a lot of mean reversion in the system. 

Returns are close to a random walk. GDP is close to a random walk with trend. 

Ray

"It isn't random at all. In other words, do you think where interest rates are is random? Do you think it is random? Do you think that it would be random that the federal reserve would tighten monetary policy? Do you think it is random that we are having inflation pressures? Do you think those things are random?"

Tyler

I think the market has a model of what will happen, and it is hard to beat that model.  

Ray

The market is like a poker game. It is a zero sum game. The smart people take money away from people who are less smart. That is the way it works.

Tyler

Well it is one thing to think that some people are smarter than others. But if they are smarter than others in their ability to spot publicly available information, it seems that is easy to copy. We should then be able to go back in history, look at those same pieces of information and use them to predict expected returns. But we can't do that. 


Ray

Well some can and some can't. I guess you look over the track records over long periods of time and decide who can and who can't. 


#tyler-cowen-random-walks
#random-walk-defense
#are-you-saying-its-all-random






# marginal thinking

When you change incentives, the people on the margin will change their behavior
Too many black people in prison
Let's give lesser sentences to some offenses, like being caught with a gun
You are changing the incentives for people (bad people) on the margin who are going to take advantage of this rule

#marginal-thinking
#economics













# [camille paglia]
These students only know how to sneer. I want to teach them how to be in awe, to appreciate the granduear of life. To recognize that human beings are a tiny spec in the context of everything happening in the Universe. 

#teaching-philosophy
#you-are-a-tiny-spec







#  waiting for people to die research idea


we all know if happens in academia: generates new research
film maker/writer story on the pod
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8HysKmz5mA
45:00
Hatchet writer always told film producers 'no.' If my book gets turned into a movie, then I will be in charge of everything.
So, the film producers just waited until he died to turn it into a movie. 

#innovation-via-death

















# schultz, patrice, dillon


Andrew schultz
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B25NCqed3qA
around 4 or 5 minutes (5 30 maybe)
I don't want to give my special to a network and have them give me notes on how to change it. My whole identity is in this special. To the network, it is a transaction, a business. To me, it is my life. 

[christopher - same with writing articles]
I want people who read me to discover what I think, not what AMJ thinks. 





How I feel in academia
- I'm not saying what you are talking about is nothing. But in the context of everything happening in the world, this is not the most relevant aspect. 
- Tim Dillon
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=181Ji48kCO4
- 2 or 3 minutes in (2:45)
- "Jaquin Pheonix is talking about milk, is talking about people killing animals, when half the country is on heroin, when there is an opiod epidemic, and people are working three jobs to drag themselves out of bankrupcy because they got sick and can't afford the health bills. Ignore all of that. Just talk about the abuse that cows suffer. What level of privilige do you have to be in society to think that the biggest problem is fucking milk. How lost do you have to be? I'm not saying animals are always treated nicely. I'm saying: we eat animals. That is how most people survive. Can we stop with this crusade as if it is the biggest problem in the country."


Everything is about gaining clout or lecturing people about how they are racist. Nobody wants to have fun anymore.






Glenn Greenwald story about his mom:

# LatinX shows disconnect and naval gazing of academia

think one of the reasons why people love so much and find so amusing the idea that the you know the academic world invented for latinos this word latinx that they hate and despise and right and the reason that's so amusing is because it shows kind of the arrogance and condescension but also this cleavage between the elite culture over here and the rest of everybody else.

 i really question the extent to which ordinary people who aren't plugged into these kinds of you know elite conceptions go around the world looking at everything through these hardened racial prisms.


# mother story: (a) humor at the workplace; (b) getting stuff done vs using job as a platform 

you know i remember, and this is very anecdotal, but my mother until the day she died she worked in a kind of blue collar job. she wasn't a factory worker but she worked in like the kind of customer service division of a company that sold airplane parts. and so it was like a little back office with 25 people or so very multi-racial and she wanted me to come in. so some of them saw me from you know they knew me from tv and stuff. so i went in she was always talking about their political arguments and their political fights.

and it's kind of amazing they had them right. 

you're not even supposed to have that -- but you know she loved them.

she loved everybody she worked with, even though they would fight all the time.

and the guy next to her was a jamaican immigrant who loved trump my mother hated trump you know so every it was all very um divergent from these stereotypes. 

i went in and they started kind of making fun of each other and ripping each other using overtly racial and ethnic and gendered humor -- and you know as somebody who lives in a world where this is not permitted you know i was kind of like the church video was like oh my god you can't make those jokes. BUT to them they found it completely benign because they knew there was no mulliganant intent behind it. 

and the discourse was unrecognizable you know people were able to fight with each other and argue and then you know consider themselves good work friends.

and there was just no sense of looking for ways to divide yourself from the person in the next cubicle because that's just not what ordinary life encourages. it's not how you thrive and get ahead.

whereas if you're looking for an audience -- if you're looking for a platform -- encouraging people to identify villains and scapegoat is one of the most beneficial tactics you can embrace




judicial temperament
you don't want a judge to be a hot head. 
you don't want the judge to care about social media branding and roasting a lawyer just for show
same for supervisors, employers, etc. 






[conspiracy theory]
We all need our "growing up" tragedy. Women are experiencing less of it now because they are in the workforce and not staying home with the kids. 
Men experience the tragedy of getting rejected by women. It causes them to develop patience, drive, vision, prioritizing, etc. 
Women stay at home with the kids, and when they do (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmAGcxx_Tjg) 12 minutes in "by staying home, I learned how to prioritize, patience, etc.), it makes them grow up.

We all need our growing up experiences. By not having kids and being at home with them, women are removing themselves from it.





[what most know about college education sucks]
Combine coddling parenting with no grades and government backed loans and you get way too many people going to college and into debt. The pool of students ballooned, but the quality decreased. To absorb the increase in people and cash, otherwise largely useless departments like underwater basket weaving flourished. Now the overall reputation of education and its relative value has tanked IMO
[what most DO NOT know about college education sucks]
administrator glut





Patrice:

I never respect people who read something and then repeat it back to me like that's intelligence. I like someone that takes what they read and then comes up with some abstract thought of their own. That's impressive. Being informed is not impressive. 


JBP, can't find quote

If all you can do is regurgitate what you heard elsewhere, then you turn from a human being into a transmitter. You have lost the thing that makes you human, the thing that I as a receiver am hoping to connect to. You are now an alien, because all you can do is transmit other material that you had no effort in creating, which makes you replacable. I could have gone and looked up the information myself. Or, I could have gone and talked to someone else to hear you. You are not needed. It makes me incredibly lonely even though I'm sitting across from and talking to you. What makes you a human is to take what you read and combine it with your experience, combine it with what you've read elsewhere, combine it with events and history, in ways that people haven't thought to do before. Sharing it with others then becomes a human experience. 





#christopher-thinking
#podcast
#quote
#cowen-grand
#sjw
#anti-woke
#andrew-schultz
#tim-dillon
#patrice-o-neal
#glenn-greenwald











# hrm textbook youtube

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1KuA9WXFoWM
https://www.youtube.com/@WilliamObenauer/search?query=HRM

#textbooks
#textbook
#hrm-lectures
#courses
#ob-course
#hrm-course











# tannenbaum teams

stupid socializing things don’t make your team better

Going to a picnic does not
- reduce role ambiguity
- resolve competing priorities
- resolve unsufficient talent
- resolve using a team when an individual could have done it


#teams
#tannenbaum-teams
#the-only-team-insight-you-need
#what-to-do-teams











# Chen, Powers, Katragadda et al., 2020 “A strategic mindset: An orientation…”

Why are some people but not others able to take on new challenges, figure them out, and solve them? They introduce a new concept to answer it: the strategic mindset.

A strategic mindset:
- asking oneself questions like
- “What can I do to help myself?”
- “How else can I do this?”
- “Is there a way to do this even better?”

Similar to but distinct from growth mindset, self efficacy, self control, grit


#strategic-mindset
#meta-cognition
#motivation






# one pillar of christopher's grand theory of the cognitive mechanisms for success: filtering

filter & execute. The new cognitive ability that matters. Ackerman ARI presentation on new cognitive abilities. 
- fear of missing out dating
- dithering: robot responds to all incoming signals and is constantly turning
- pranav: github engineers create bots to do low-complexity work
- cal newport avoid too much email
- experts: know what to skim and avoid. with info incoming at fast rates, it is as if we are all placed back at the beginner stage
- people are more productive when they are given space (stanford randomized experiment call center on work from home vs work in office; harvard berstein space beween CI tasks = better performance)
- tim ferris reduce the number of decisions you need to make; i only have 3 outfits, i only eat 3 things. 
- your ideas list will always grow faster than your "things executed" list (bernhardson). 


new task ackerman created
- find information on the internet
my new task
- walk into a setting. filter irrelevant info. 
++ when you get placed into a job, they will put you on a platform. slack. teams. gmail. meister task. you need to actively filter this stuff. 



#christopher-grand-theory
#success
#cognitive-ability
#ackerman-extension
#filtering





# money matters. men want to work to make money and provide

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/LAVCusFCufI
my paycheck means something
my work accomplished something

#motivation
#money-matters
#tik-tok-money












# principles for effective virtual teamwork

1. collaboration technology shouldn't cause extra work

Use tools that are actually tools, not extra work for employees.

2. be explicit when communicating

What is needed? What is the deliverable? When?

3. with diverse people, you will disagree on terms and language

4. find a way to create virtual presence

acknowledge that people are there, and their efforts are seen

for asynchronous teams (different place, different time), find a way to have people feel that the project is alive and active, therefore they will continue to make effort toward the team goal.

5. it is beneficial to build in f2f meetings for social contact


https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/1498765.1498797


#virtual-teamwork
#asynchronous-teams
#distance-work
#remote-work
#managing-at-a-distance


































# Kerr, Kerr, & Dalton, 2020 “Risk attitudes and personality traits…”

Entrepreneurs display high risk tolerance and strong self efficacy, internal locus of control, and need for achievement
- compared to other workers and CEOs


#risk-taking
#organizational-behavior














# Manduca & Sampson, 2020 “Punishing and toxic neighborhood …”

What are the predictors of blacks and whites having poor life outcomes? (like going to jail or staying in poverty…)

First, we examine neighborhoods that are harsh on children’s development: those characterized by high levels of violence, incarceration, and lead exposure. Second, we examine potential supportive or offsetting mechanisms that promote children’s development, such as informal social control, cohesion among neighbors, and organizational participation.

we have shown that theoretically relevant aspects of the social and physical environment, most notably exposure to violence, lead, and incarceration, directly predict lower intergenerational income mobility, adult incarceration, and teenage birth among children who grow up poor. Although the magnitude of association and the explanatory power of toxicity is similar for blacks and whites, exposure levels, in Chicago at least, are markedly different.


#poverty









# Ong, Theseira, Ng, 2020 “Reducing debt improves psychological …”

Debt is not only a financial burden but also a psychological one. People who are given debt relief perform better on cognitive functioning tests.


#poverty









# Rhodes, Cardarelli, & Leslie, 2020 “Asking young children to …”

Asking young children to “do science” instead of “be scientists” increases science engagement in a randomized field experiment.

Ask teachers to use different language. Days later, kids in experimental group persist at the science task longer (small effect)

GOOD STUDY FOR STATS
- here is a study I like but man that effect size is small. Go find me 2 studies that make you feel the same way. I’d like to believe this result but the effect is tiny.


#undergrad-reading










# Smith, Wilkins, & Leung, 2020 “Attendance trends threaten future … ”


Really cool “forecasting” study. Here are trends about state park attendence. Here are 4 different models of what could happen in the future.

Visitations to state parks are rising rapidly. So costs for infrustructure in the future are going to be high.


#forecasting
#stats








# Stoet & Geary, 2020 “Gender differences in pathways … “

Way more many females enroll in college than males. Why?
- males have severe reading deficiencies
- when society places a strong belief on girls attending university, then males are less likely to apply


#intelligence
#sex-differences
#university-admissions
#female-overrepresentation
#anti-woke















# Broeke et al., 2020 “Temporal dynamics of sitting behavior …”

What are the sitting and standing patterns people make at work?

Specifically, our findings are consistent with the idea that, later in the day, people feel more fatigued (and possibly more restless and less concentrated); as a result, they more quickly change posture while working (e.g., stand up while reading a document), more quickly switch to a different work task that involves a change in posture (e.g., decide to print some documents), and/or more quickly take a short break that involves a change in posture (e.g., walk to the coffee machine).

In a similar vein, our findings on activity in the last 5 h also contradict previous findings on other health behaviors. That is, previous research suggests that people are less motivated to engage in active behavior after they have exerted effort (e.g., people are less motivated to go to the gym after an effortful workday; refs. 21–23). In contrast, our findings show that people display fairly stable sitting and standing patterns over a timeframe of several hours. Thus, our findings imply that previous effort exertion does not necessarily diminish future effort exertion



#sitting
#fatigue











# Moore & Healy, 2008 “The trouble with overconfidence”

Nuance on the better-than-average effect. Why people predict that they are overconfident.

People have imperfect knowledge of their own performances and even more imperfect knowledge of others’ performances. As a result of this imperfect knowledge, beliefs tend to regress toward prior expectations (more so for others than for self).

Belief about performance => true performance that isn’t revealed to you => Belief about performance

Overestimation
- overestimate own performance or actual ability
- people believe they answered 6 items correctly on a 10 q quiz when really they only got 3 right

- you believe you can perform 5. You super perform (score not revealed to you but you get a 10; perhaps because the task was easy). Your updated belief is an understimate: you think you only got 7
- you believe you can perform 5. You under perform (score not revealed but you get a 1; hard task). Update is overstimate: think you got a 4

Overplacement
- better than average effect

- you believe you can perform 5. You super perform (10, easy task). Your updated belief in yourself is an underestimate (8), whereas your updated belief in others is a super underestimate (6).
- you believe you can perform 5. You under perform (2, hard task). Your updated belief in yourself is an overestimate (3), whereas your updated belief in others is a super overestimate (4).

#overconfidence














01 Framing, Big Questions, NSF

1) Noise pollution and its effects on performance  
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1919028&HistoricalAwards=false  
\- find organizations near train station  
\- distance to train station  
\- effectiveness  
\- correlated?

Noise pollution is pervasive around the globe and predicted to grow in extent, frequency and severity (Goines and Hagler 2007). Decades of cognitive science research has established that noise negatively affects the learning and attainments of school children (ex. Shield and Dockrell 2003; Evans and Lepore 1993), while recent work in economics has shown that noise also lowers worker productivity (Dean 2017). However, the exact mechanism through which noise impairs performance and productivity remains uncertain and unquantified. This project aims at examining the importance of an often-suggested mechanism, which is attention. While central to economic behavior, only recent advances enable costs of attention to be quantified (Caplin et al. 2018). This project will apply this new measurement method and be the first to quantify the costs of noise in terms of attention. This project will also assess to what extent individuals are aware of these cost impacts. The ability to obtain unconfounded cost estimates of noise, and know whether these costs are correctly perceived, have important implications for policy makers. Whether the detrimental effects of noise pollution are correctly perceived determines whether awareness and educational campaigns, or active noise control strategies should be the policy maker's priority. Better estimates of the costs of noise are a crucial input for the valuation of noise abatement strategies such as building of acoustic barriers, changes in road profiles, traffic restrictions, and urban planning based on noise maps. In addition, this work will help better assess the location of schools and design of workplaces.  
In order to quantify the costs of noise, a theoretical framework will be combined together with a lab experiment. The theoretical framework serves as a precise and objective measurement device that allows costs of attention to be recovered from choice data in the same way as costs of production can be recovered in competitive supply. Building on this framework, noise is modeled as: (i) a change in the marginal costs of attention, (ii) a direct disutility, and (iii) beliefs about the productivity impacts of noise. Then, an experiment is designed to estimate the costs of attention of two common sources of noise pollution in practice: speech and city noise. After participants work on an incentivized task - both under quiet and noisy conditions, their beliefs about their performance as well as their willingness to pay (WTP) for a final round in quiet conditions will be elicited. Comparing these beliefs and WTP to the participants? estimated costs will shed light on awareness of noise impacts and adoption of protective measures.

2) Lay theory states that lack of confidence is a barrier to performance. But we also know that people are generally overconfident. How do we reconsile these views?  
[https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1921490&HistoricalAwards=false](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1921490&HistoricalAwards=false)

A common lay theory states that a lack of confidence is a barrier to performance in many areas of life, such as athletic and scholastic performance. The assumption is that an underperforming individual could better live up to their potential if they only could enhance their confidence. This stands in stark contrast to conclusions from behavioral decision research, which finds that people are generally overconfident. By this account, increasing confidence without concurrently increasing knowledge should produce a host of negative outcomes, such as maladaptive risk taking and ignoring relevant information. This work attempts to reconcile these views, by showing that unjustified confidence in knowledge (i.e., confidence after controlling for knowledge) has both positive and negative effects, and that the resulting impact on decision outcomes is situation-specific. By doing so, this work will help inform interventions that target people's confidence levels.  
To accomplish this goal, this 4-year research project introduces a theoretical framework for investigating the effects of unjustified confidence in knowledge and uses this framework to advance our understanding of how unjustified confidence influences decision outcomes. This project leverages a mixture of research designs, including survey-based and experimental studies. Phase 1, in year 1, will lay the groundwork by identifying the most promising interventions for increasing and decreasing confidence and scoping promising psychological and behavioral mechanisms by which confidence can influence decision outcomes. Phase 2, in years 2 and 3, will test individual pathways from unjustified confidence to decision outcomes. These studies will build up to Phase 3, in year 4, which will involve a large-scale test of how unjustified confidence affects psychological processes (such as expecting good decision outcomes), how these in turn influence behavioral processes (such as risk taking), how these effects are influenced by environmental factors (e.g., ease of use of new information), and how these ultimately influence decision outcomes. This project will end by constructing a comprehensive model of the consequences of confidence, which will guide future research and interventions to improve decision making.

3) See Hollenbeck ARI proposal

4) Chris Nye workplace interests and personality

Work plays a substantial role in many individual lives and influences adult personality development. We know that the most substantial changes in adult personality occur when individuals enter the workforce; these changes are consistent with the reward structure and expectations of the work environment. But we do not know much about the specific mechanisms that link experiences in the workplace with personality trait change. This project will evaluate the complex effects of work, including the absence of regular or meaningful work, on personality trait development in young adults. The results of this research will show what skills are needed to find a job and to succeed in the workplace, and provide valuable information about the effects of unemployment and underemployment on personality development. This information will help policy makers identify potential interventions that can aid underemployed workers in becoming more competitive for full-time permanent positions. Results from this project may be especially helpful to colleges and universities as they strive to promote successful transitions from college to the workforce.  
The project will conduct a multi-wave longitudinal study of close to 1,000 graduating seniors from a large Midwestern university who are entering the workforce. Participants will be solicited from all available majors on campus and baseline data will be collected during their final semester in college. Subsequent surveys will be administered every six months for the first two years of the study to obtain detailed information about transitions to the workforce. Annual surveys will then be administered for two additional years to obtain longer-term information about personality trait change, workplace experiences, and the effects of unemployment or underemployment. Personality traits will be assessed at each time point using both self- and informant-reports. In addition, information will also be gathered about participant work experiences, perceived fit and engagement with their jobs, and investment in family and community activities. Structural equation modeling will be used to examine the effects of work experiences on adult personality trait development while controlling for other life events. The results of these analyses will enhance theoretical understanding of how work is related to psychological and social development in the 21st century.

```
Faculty Research Projects Fall 2021

Daisy
1 
2
3


Chris
Broadly, I study employee selection and assessment, individual differences (e.g., personality, interests, cognitive ability), and quantitative methods so if you are interested in these topics come talk to me and we can find a project to work on. However, below are some more specific opportunities.
1. Individual differences and work experiences: For a few years now, I have had an NSF funded grant to collect data on individual differences (i.e., personality and interests) and work experiences. I now have a lot of data related to this project that examines people’s workplace experiences in a longitudinal setting. The eventual goal of this project is to look at how personality and interests change over time as people gain more work experience but there are a lot of variables in the dataset and a lot of potential research projects related to recruitment, job search, personality, interests, the effects of COVID on workers, unemployment, underemployment, and turnover. I have ideas but am also open to other research projects using these data.
2. Contingent workers: I have a dataset that examined and compared contingent workers (e.g., part-time, contract workers) to full-time employees to compare their attitudes and commitment to the organization. There are lots of potential options here so if you are interested in contingent work then come talk to me.
3. Employee Selection and technology: I am broadly interested in employee selection and assessment and am happy to talk about research opportunities here. Lately, I have been particularly interested in using technology to evaluate job applicants. For example, I have been thinking about novel ways of assessing vocational interests using advanced technologies. Similarly, I am also interested in how organizations can use technology to effectively screen applicants using resumes, video interviews, and/or text analysis.
4. Person-Job Fit: My research on employee selection and vocational interests has led me to focus more on P-J fit and I am broadly interested in this topic and how we can measure fit and understand the meaning of fit. There are a number of quantitative and conceptual issues to address here but also a number of substantive questions. For example, I am interested in the idea of compensatory fit and whether good fit in one aspect of a person’s life can compensate for poor fit in another aspect of their life.
5. Quantitative Methods: I also have a lot of research on examining quantitative methods for organizational research and I am happy to talk about opportunities to collaborate if you are interested in this topic. I currently have a project that a student could get involved with that is examining methods for conducting meta-analyses. This is a simulation study and would require some R programming but there are several people working on this project so you would have some support as you learn how to program in R.


Kevin
1  Autonomous vehicles - impacts on career options (with Daisy) - possibly could bring someone else on winter semester  - have to see if there is enough work to do
2  Training transfer enhancing intervention study - looking at coaching leaders on how to help trainees transfer high end sales training.  Data collection starts this fall - perhaps some help once data starts being collected - two other faculty (one outside MSU, one in HRLIR) to see about need



Rick

Evaluating new results in the context of the existing nomological net.  Meehl’s crud factor shows that everything in social science correlates with everything at about .14.  Why then do we use a null hypothesis of 0.0 as the baseline for our significance testing?  Moreover, we have the tools needed to evaluate new results in the broader correlational structure of existing results.  I’d like to develop and demonstrate an approach for setting the bar a bit higher before we accept novel results as meaningful.  The construct of ‘grit’ is a good example of where this is needed.
I’m not sure where this is headed but recent events have me very interested in belief and attitude polarization and lockin.  What are the implications of having wildly different belief and attitude structures (e.g., politics, religion, vaccination, masking) for working well together?  If we can’t change beliefs (hopefully we can), how can we help team members work well together and respect each other despite these differences?


Ann Marie
1 Confronting bias/allyship/third party intervention projects -- there are actually 8 different papers in this bucket, all at writing stages.  While there is nothing specifically new here that I am doing this fall, my broad interest is in examining what is genuine v. performative in the DEI space, effectiveness of different strategies for bias confrontation, and impacts of confrontation, and would be willing to move something forward on those lines in the spring.
2  Identity-contingency cues projects -- this line of work addresses how environmental cues, particularly in recruiting and selection contexts, affect attraction, fit, and other perceptions as well as performance on assessments.  There are three papers here in writing stages, and there is one applied partnership that I have been slowly cultivating for doing something in recruitment advertising but there is not yet a solid, defined new project.
3    Gendered Behaviors at work -- over the past 10 years there have been a variety of projects looking at differential treatment on the basis of gender (e.g., in feedback, communications, interview settings, rewards).  The last one that I am still actively working on this fall with colleagues at the University of Nice relates to gender, emotional display and leadership effectiveness.  There could be an opportunity for someone to take on an outgrowth from that project next spring.
4.   Selection --   on the selection side, this fall I am writing a chapter on AI in selection assessments, am planning a study with an organizational partner (which will have a very slow data collection) on how specific disabilities impact performance on some prototypical assessments (cog and personality), and  I also am engaged in a project with AVI data with an alum.


Quinetta 
DEI and firm performance projects: This includes several projects to explore how different approaches to diversity, equity and inclusion (e.g., practice bundles, board diversity, employee resource groups, etc.) influence organizational functioning and performance outcomes
Understanding inclusive leadership: This includes a couple of projects to examine inclusive leadership from a multifoci perspective, including employee and leader experiences, and to distinguish it from other types of leadership
Diversity training effectiveness projects: This includes a couple of studies to examine how design features in the pre- and post-training environments may enhance diversity learning and transfer
Creating equitable work environments - This includes a range of projects to specifically examine the “equity” dimension of DEI, such as the effects of gender and race on pay in top management teams, performance perceptions of new CEOs, and an exploration of a new dimension of justice that captures equality of opportunity 
It should be noted that these projects are in the data collection or a more advanced stage, I would be willing to explore new projects in these and related topic areas.
```

#nsf-abstracts
#nsf


























# Dakin & Ryder, 2020 “Reciprocity and behavioral heterogeneity…”

Paper about the causes of stable social networks. Agent-based model example. Code in supplemental. Explanation on page 2998

Start with a social network. This initial network determines, for each individual, his or her probability of interacting with others
- run it over 5 time steps and see who interacts
- based on who interacts, draw the new social network
- is the new network the same as the old network?

They look at how initial density and size moderate the results

Keywords
#agent-based-model
#cooperation
#networks







# DeJesus et al. 2020 “Generic language in scientific communication”

Authors of scientific papers are using generic language. Doing so…
- is ubiquitous
- leads readers to think that the results are more important and generalizable (compared to specific language)



#philsophy-of-science
#bad-writing








# Duckworth et al., 2020 “Cognitive and noncognitive predictors of success “


What predicts a person’s success in military school?
- cog ability predicts academic performance
- grit predicts graduation
- physical ability predicts training success


So, a good paper on the notion of “how are you defining your DV? Doing so will give you a good sense of what predicts it”


#individual-differences
#performance
#undergrad-reading
#military
#predict-success









# Huang, Greene, & Bazerman 2020 “Veil-of-ignorance reasoninng …”

Participants who are forced to use veil-of-ignorance reasoning make more utilitarian choices in dilemma games.
- Consider a problem
- Make a choice about what you think is right without knowing…
- your own personal circumstances
- who you would be in the situation

#mindsets
#decision-making
#philosophy
#reasoning





# Kern et al. 2020 “Social media-predicted personality traits …”


Analyze twitter text and self-reported job titles to show that jobs have unique personality and value clusters.

Good cites on the idea that the fit between one’s occupation and personality is important.

Get twitter users who self-identify title. Take all their text. Use watson to pull sentiment and personality from text. What are the personality traits of different occupations?


#big-data
#twitter
#text-analysis
#person-job-fit







# Kraus et al. 2020 “Evidence for the reproduction of social class”

Ask person A to briefly listen to person B. The extent to which B pronounces words correctly offers clues to his or her social class. Person A then judges person B for hiring: fit, competence, starting salary. People who pronounce better are rated more highly.

The authors frame this around inequality. But in my mind pronounciation is in fact a good signal of intelligence, so it makes sense that interviewers use it.


#interviews
#class





# Lee, James et al. 2019 “Optimism is associated with exceptional longevity “

Optimism is related to 11 to 15% longer lifespan and to greater odds of achieving exceptional longevity, or living beyond 85 years.


#longevity
#well-being





# Lu, Nisbett, & Morris, 2020 “Why East Asians but not South Asians are underrepresented in leadership positions “

East Asians were less likely than South Asians and whites to attain leadership positions, whereas South Asians outperformed whites. The leadership attainment gap between East Asians and South Asians was consistently explained by cultural differences in assertiveness, but not by prejudice or motivation.



#assertiveness
#anti-woke
#cultural-differences
#disparity
#glass-ceiling





# beshears "the effect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions"

Contrary to expectations (and predictions from experts on nudging), providing peer savings information decreases how much people put into their 401k for retirement. 


[christopher note]
The effects of nudges tend to be small and sporadic. Sometimes nudge X improves behavior, sometimes nudge X harms behavior. 

The most effective nudges seem to be those that make an important behavior super easy/default. 

Beshears "nudging: progress to date and future directions"


They also get studied in the context of silly little experiments
Morvinsky & Saccardo "Mis-nudging morality"



keywords
#finance
#retirement-savings
#mimic-retirement-study
#nudges
#behavioral-economics
 











# Rosenberg et al. 2020 “Functional connectivity predicts changes “


Sustained attention varies across people and within persons.


#sustained-attention
#within-between






# Vaci et al. 2019 “The join influence of intelligence and practice “


High performance depends on both intelligence and practice, and their interaction.
- With the same amount of practice, high intelligent people will acquire skill more quickly and have slower declines

#intelligence
#practice
#mastery
#motivation








# Wang, Ge, et al. 2020 “Altruistic behaviors relieve physical pain”

Ask participants to be altruistic while feeling physical pain and they experience lower levels of pain.


#social-pain
#cooperation



# Wilmot & Ones 2019 “A century of research on conscientiousness at work“

C is the most potent noncognitive construct for occupational performance.

Themes of C’s occupational functioning: 1) motivation for goal- directed performance, 2) preference for more predictable environ- ments, 3) interpersonal responsibility for shared goals, 4) commitment, 5) perseverance, 6) self-regulatory restraint to avoid counterproductiv- ity, and 7) proficient performance—especially for 8) conventional goals, 9) requiring persistence.

Not as effective in high complexty occupations.


#performance
#conscientiousness
#individual-differences







# people do not discuss norms for handling tasks explicitly

People jump right to "let's go" rather than "how should we proceed?"

Hackman and Morris (1975) suggested that in-process tacit coordination is a prevalent phenomenon given that the task-oriented groups that they observed rarely discussed strategies for how to go about performing the task unless explicitly instructed to do so. They noted that “while most tasks do not constrain a group from overtly discussing and reformulating its performance strategies, there appears to be a pervasive norm in groups not to address such matters explicitly” (p. 67). 

#ob-notes
#ob
#hackman
#christopher-thinking
#ob-insight

















# sampling and measures examples

Recruiting participants & measures


sampling

Study1 - cross section

Study 1 included 337 full-time employees with
side-hustles. We recruited participants through
Facebook pages and Reddit communities associated
with side-hustles, LinkedIn, and a network of MBA
graduates. This recruitment approach has been used
in studies in various top-tier management journals
(e.g., Colquitt, Baer, Long, & Halvorsen-Ganepola,
2014; Vogel, Rodell, & Lynch, 2016). Our sample was
45% female. On average, the participants were 29.6
years old (SD 5 6.94), mostly held a bachelor’s degree
or higher (69%), and engaged in a variety of sidehustles (e.g., Uber driving, graphic design, and
selling goods online) while having full-time jobs.

The participants provided their demographics in a
registration survey and completed three surveys
separated by three weeks. A total of 417 participants
rated their side-hustle complexity in the first survey,
and 370 participants rated their side-hustle motives in
the second survey (89% response rate). In the third
survey, 342 participants rated the extent to which they
generally experienced empowerment when working
on their side-hustle (92% response rate).

Study 2 - ESM

In Study 2, we considered the spillover of daily sidehustle empowerment into full-time work performance through a 10-day ESM study of 80 employee–
coworker dyads, resulting in 2,124 observations. Our
sample was 62% female. On average, the focal employees in our sample were 40 years old (SD 5 11.00)
andhadworked for their full-time employers for 10 years
(SD 5 9.31). The participants performed a variety of
side-hustles (e.g., driving for Uber or Lyft, event
photography, completing surveys online, and selling
goods online) and full-time jobs (e.g., teaching, software engineering, sales, and nursing),which suited our
research design as this variety improves generalizability (Kerlinger & Lee, 2000).


measures

nikhil 
used 3 period data but cross-sectional
used self-report task performance


hoch & kozlowski
self report "structural supports" (my performance appraisal system is motivating)
self report "info and communication management" (info I receive is often unclear and not precise)
self report "team learning" (my team actively searches our own performance for deficits)
self report "team performance" via leaders (team leader rates team based on quantity, quality, and within budget)


Wong perceived isolation in distributed teams
- ESM every other day surveys. Captured at end of day
- survey packet: work location (work from home today vs work at office), perceived communication quality, perceived isolation, perceived role ambiguity, perceived team coordination (our team worked together in a well-coordinated fashion)
- study: distributed teams are hard because people are isolated. Do people perceive to be isolated? Does that relate to perceive poor teamwork?

Wong interdependence in distributed teams
It is increasingly common for organizations to organize in distributed agile teams, in which team members are geographically distributed and coordinate through computer-mediated communication tools to perform their work.
We propose that while initiated task interdependence is likely to enhance the role clarity of others, received task interdependence is likely to stimulate the focus of one’s own role clarity. Both processes enhance the performance in distributed agile teams simultaneously in unique ways, because as communication becomes less rich and less frequent due to the geographical dispersion, the need for role clarity of others and self is higher. 
- online survey to employees at company (20% response rate), cross-sectional
- survey packet: initiated and received interdependence, perceived role clarity of self and others, perceived team performance ("how would you assess your team performance")


#sampling-example
#measures-example
#recruiting-participants
#survey-research-examples










# distributed work hype

### setting up the problem of distributed teams so you can study anything

In recent decades, organizations have increasingly employed dis- tributed teams with digital solutions as a means to improve organiza- tional efficiency and effectiveness (Colbert, Yee, & George, 2016). Distributed teams can easily be arranged across temporal, geographical, and organizational boundaries, and are assumed to benefit employees and organizations alike through increased flexibility, work-life balance, job satisfaction, and performance (Gilson, Maynard, Young, Vartiainen, & Hakonen, 2015; Liao, 2017; Martins, Gilson, & Maynard, 2004). However, individuals working in distributed teams, including leaders, may seldom meet their fellow team members in person. This makes the team dynamics and leadership challenges different from those of co- located teams (Dulebohn & Hoch, 2017; Gibson & Gibbs, 2006).
Despite the alleged benefits, distributed teams can also obtain less desirable individual and organizational outcomes than traditional co- located teams do (Gibson & Gibbs, 2006; Ortiz de Guinea, Webster, & Staples, 2012). For instance, compared to face-to-face teams, dis- tributed teams are likely to display less organizational citizenship be- haviors (Ganesh & Gupta, 2010), experience more communication is- sues (Daim et al., 2012; Huang, Kahai, & Jestice, 2010), and higher task conflict, as well as lower levels of team satisfaction, knowledge sharing, trust, and cooperative behavior (Hoch & Kozlowski, 2014; Ortiz de Guinea et al., 2012).

#distributed-work-hype
#asynchronous-hype
#temporary-work-hype
#distributed-intro
#mimic-intro-distributed
#platform-work-intro
#mimic-intro-platform












# in OB, we do taxonomy rather than process


What triggers knowledge hiding behavior?
Jha & Varkkey

Rather than a sequence of events, they create a giant, one-step taxonomy. 


images
taxonomy-rather-than-process

#christopher-thinking
#academese
#grad-philosophy
#philosophy-of-science
#ob-notes
#amj























# Goyal et al. 2019 "Persistent metabolic youth in the aging of female..."




The female brain has a persistently lower metabolic brain age -- relative to their chronological age -- compared with the male brain




So, women's brains are younger than men's.

Think Haidt talk about "everyone is female in the womb. Then, you get a shot of testosterone in the brain and that makes you a male. Changes your organs and brain development"


#anti-woke
#scaling
#sex-differences
#haidt
#gender
#metabolic-brain















# social animal
# walk up intro
# introduce yourself to girls

[dark coat with white shoes]
Hello ma'am, love that outfit. Dark on top. Light white shoes on the bottom. Great combo.

Just wanted to say hi for a second, maybe get your number. How is your day going?

[if she says, "oh I just threw this on today. Not a big deal. I don't look good."]
Oh my, a girl who is pretty but also modest, it is almost like you were made for me. 
Although I'm not sure. Part of me thinks you are kind an innocent, and part of me thinks you're the devil. 


#social-animal









# Ajzen & Kruglanski, 2019


A paper that combines the theory of reasoned action and goal systems theory.

Behavior is caused by intentions.
Intentions are caused by
- expectancy & value
- subjective norms (do people I care about approve or disprove this behavior?)
- perceived presence of facilitating factors (I have the resources / time)

What this paper adds is the notion that currently activated goals (which are caused by the environment) change my expectancy, value, and subjective norms. Is a given action going to advance goals that are currently activated for me? When a goal is activated, it causes me to consider behavioral options in the hopes of attaining that goal.

Issues
- not dynamic box and arrow diagram
- really confusing text
- what I said above is the true theory; but it isn't captured in their box and arrow


The accurate prediction of intentions on behavior requires that the behavior is seen as capable of attaining currently active goals (from the point of view of the participant).


#bad-writing
#motivation
#self-regulation












# Big Stats Idea

https://mdscheuerell.github.io/PSAW2/session_2/lec_04_SSM.html#22


Realizations & Observations:

- process level: history experiences a single realization of a process.

- observation level: data is one observation set of a process.


#stats-idea
#realizations
#distinguishability
#glm
#dgp
















# Liu, Brooks, & Spelke, 2019 “Origins of the concept of cause, cost … “


Paper about babies learning the concepts of cause and goal-directed behavior.

The researchers make inferences about brain discovery by analyzing how long the infants look at something.

A long stare / gaze means cognitive processesing and focus.


#gaze
#research-methods
#undergrad-reading








# Borman, Rozek, Pyne, & Hanselman 2019 “Reappraising academic and social adversity … “

An intervention helped sixth graders transition into a new school year.

Intervention materials taught students that middle school adversity is common, short-lived, and due to external, temporary causes rather than personal inadequacies. As a result, students realized improved social and psychological well-being, fewer absences and disciplinary infractions, and higher grade point averages.

See appendix page 34 for the treatment. Students read quotes about others being nervous transitioning into middle school so that they realize that others were scared to. Students are asked to write about why it’s reasonable to be afraid. Then asked to write about why it is reasonable to get over those fears.


#performance
#well-being
#school
#intervention
#undergrad-reading
#mindsets










# Eskreis-Winkler et al. 2019 “A large-scale field experiment shows giving advice … “

Students randomly assigned to give advice to younger students earned higher grades.

Claim: giving advice to others => your own achievement.

[christpoher research q]: but is the advice actually useful?


#school
#performance
#intervention
#motivation










# Park & MacDonald 2019 “Consistency between individuals past and current … “

As people move from relationship to relationship they end up with romantic partners who are similar in personality. Your next romantic partner will be similar in personality to the personality of your last romantic partner.

Less robust for people high in openness to experience.


#personality
#relationships
#sexual-selection
#dating










# Matias 2019 “Preventing harassment and increasing group … “

In online discussion forumns, people are jerks to each other. Most don’t join the conversation for fear of harassment. If you display the community expectations online, people are less likely to be jerks. Participation also increases.


keywords
- online discussions
- fear of harrassment
- values statements

#online
#telework
#chats
#fear-of-harassment
#values-statements
#chat-rooms





research idea
- fear of harassment/cancel at University. How many professors are scared?














# Riddle & Sinclair, 2019 “Racial disparities in school-based …”

A good example of what people mean when they say systemic racism.

Black students are subject to disciplinary action at rates much higher than their white counterparts. This study says it is due to racial bias.

Correlate county disciplinary disparity toward blacks with county-level estimates of racial bias using the Implicit test website.

So, some school districts have high black discipline rates, others have low black discipline rates.

Out of everyone that has taken the implicit test on the Project Implicit website, filter it to only people from the given school districts above. Some districts score high on implicit bias, others score low. Those differences correlate with school district black discipline rates.

Really? What are the mechanisms? How do you know that scores on this test lead to person A viewing an act by a white person and letting him off but viewing an act by a black person and giving him disciplinary measures? How do you know that the people taking the IAT were even the same people that interact with students?

Regional levels of bias could be associated with the size of racial student disciplinary disparities for a number of reasons. We highlight several that are likely to be driven by intergroup contact and/or sociopolitical power of the majority group. First, being in an area with elevated racial bias likely means encountering individuals who have negative feelings and beliefs about one’s group and whose actions within and/or outside of an educational setting could contribute to disciplinary disparities. For example, if teachers and administrators are biased, then they may be more likely to make decisions that are unfavorable to black students, such as deciding that a given misbehavior is worthy of disciplinary action. Similarly, if members of the community are biased, they may more readily perceive transgressions from black students than from white students. The consequences of such interactions may be especially likely to lead to disparate outcomes in high-bias regions when there is ample opportunity for these sorts of intergroup interactions to take place (i.e., intergroup contact is frequent). Second, the norms and structural factors that characterize regions higher in bias may constrain even those individuals who are not biased themselves into engaging in or suborning actions that negatively impact students of color (15, 16). For example, biased administrators or local voters may use their sociopolitical power to support policies that disproportionately punish students of color, such as zero-tolerance policies or implementation of random drug sweeps (17). Additionally, biases assessed at the regional level might reflect affordances of the local environment (e.g., confederate statues, biased media) that undergird these biases and prime behaviors that contribute to disciplinary disparities (18)



#systemic-racism
#implicit-bias












# Chang et al. 2019 “The mixed effects of online diversity training … “


One-off interventions and training get you short term attitude changes but not behavior changes.


#diversity-training
#attitude-vs-behavior















# Le Mens, Kovacs, Avrahami, & Kareev, 2018 “How endogenous crowd formation undermines “

Paper about Denrell’s sampling bias applied to joining a crowd and the wisdom of that crowd.

Wisdom of crowds can be surprisingly accurate. But the people must be independent. If ratings are influenced by prior ratings (such as in online systems), then the wisdom of teh crowd diminishes.

Prior research focuses on fixed crowds. This research states that crowds of evaluators grow unfairly. The mechanism they propose is a sampling one: the extent to which early and nonrepresentative evaluations are corrected by subsequent evaluations.

Consider a restaurant rater with a unique taste, who is among the first to experience and rate a truly average restaurant. If he rates the restaurant as extremely good, then others will be likely to choose it, experience it, and rate it. The average rating would then go down and level off. However, if the unique rater gives it a poor rating, others would be likely to avoid it and the bad rating would remain. Asymmetry in judges joining the set.

This sampling mechanism leads to a negativity bias. Regression to the mean refers to the statistical phenomenon that in the dynamics of stochastic processes, extreme outcomes—which may reflect error—tend to be followed by less extreme outcomes. Applied to the dynamics of average ratings, it implies that after an additional rating becomes aggregated into the average rating, the average rating will tend to be less extreme than before. High average ratings tend to go down, whereas low average ratings tend to go up. If additional ratings tend to arrive when the average rating is high, then downward corrections tend to dominate. Overall, a negative bias in average ratings emerges.

The negative bias in average ratings is especially strong for average ratings based on few ratings, whereas there is almost no bias for average ratings based on many ratings.


#denrell-sampling
#wisdom-of-crowd












# Fryer 2016 "The pupil factory"

We know specialization makes a collective more efficient and productive. Do students perform better if teachers are specialized? Randomized controlled trials say no. BUT, the specializaed teachers spent less time with their students. Many confounds.

Great intro on the merits of specialization.
- Henry Forde broke the assembly task into 84 discrete steps and trained workers to do just one
- Doing so reduced production time of a car from 12.5 hours to 93 minutes
- Prior to implementation, Ford created, on average, 68773 cars per year
- After, production increased to 170,211 cars in a year

Specializing in the production of a subset of the tasks necessry to produce final output allows workers to gain efficiency in that task. Smith identifies three channels through which division of labor leads to efficiency gains.
- dividing a larger task into smaller tasks allows each worker to gain skill in his designated task that he would not otherwise be able to attain
- reducing the number of tasks a worker must manage reduces the transition time from one task to the next
- when you know a lot about something simple, you are more likely to innovate


[research idea]
- individual level division of labor and compartmentalization
- Consider reviewing studies for a paper
- route inefficient: look up name, read article, catelogue, etc.
- route efficient: store, skim, trim, only read what you know for sure is worth your time


#specialization
#division-of-labor
#economics
#school






# Fryer 2018 “Reconciling results on racial differences in police … “

Public commentaries say black males are disproportionately killed by police. Fryer finds that, conditional on police interaction, there are no racial differences in who the police shoot.

#police
#racial-shooting
#systemic-racism
#economics
#anti-woke










# Kiley & Vaisey, 2020


Do people actually change their beliefs and attitudes or not?

No. Attitude change comes from replacing people, not from one person changing his or her belief. Younger people, though, are more likely to update their attitudes.

They compare an “active updating model” (hidden state space) to a “settled dispotiions model “ (dynamic factor analysis).
- great model comparison
- super simple models, each with a theoretical underpinning

Method: do people actually change their ratings on items measured by general social survey?


#state-space
#attitude-change
#social-psych
#developmental-psych












# success after chains

Three examples: you and your community were wronged. You and your community, rather than wait for a government to come save you, made yourselves better. 

Amy: if hit by a bus, the driver is at fault, yes. But if you ever want to walk again, you have to get yourself to rehab and complete the painful exercises, daily.

Sowell: when slavery ended, a minority of slaves could read. One generation later, a majority of blacks could read. That happened not because of a government program or because of repayments, but because the community understood that they were going to need to teach themselves to read to become effective citizens. 

Psychology of Money story about Japan: after WW2, Japan was depleted and left to nothing. One generation later, it was one of the richest countries in the world (see images: "success-after_chains"

Quote by Ajay and Jeff that I completely disagree with:
President Johnson recognized this in a speech at Howard University, saying
You do not take a man who for years has been hobbled by chains, liberate him,
bring him to the starting line of a race, saying, ‘You are free to compete with all
the others,’ and still justly believe you have been completely fair …. This is the
next and more profound stage of the battle for civil rights. We seek not just 
freedom but opportunity, not just legal equity but human ability, not just equality
as a right and a theory, but equality as a fact and as a result. (Johnson, 1965). 

keywords
#grouped-ideas
#anti-woke
#anti-anti-racism
#reparations
#reparations-wont-work
#heal-yourself
#overcomming-tragedy
#starting-from-scratch
#equal-opportunities
#eliminating-gaps
#ajay-jeff-disagreement




















# Cicala, Fryer, & Spenkuch, 2017 “Self-selection and comparative advantage in social interactions”


A student’s ability rank has an effect on his or her behavior. When they are low-ranking, they act out if given the opportunity.


Becoming a small fish in a big pond is associated with maladaptive behavior, especially when there are opportunities to “act out.”

Experiment:

Between February 2015 and May 2015, we recruited nearly six hundred children from two public middle schools in Houston, TX and incentivized them to solve mazes in a custom-made computer game. According to our conversations with principals and teachers, children at these schools have extensive
experience playing comparable games on their phones or even on the schools' computers. By embedding our experiment in a familiar context, we hope to replicate as many of the myriad situational factors that may affect students' behavior as we possibly can, while maintaining enough experimental control to identify causal effects.

During the initial stage of the game, students were asked to solve a common set of mazes in order to establish a baseline measure of ability. The software then publicly revealed the ordinal rank as well as the cardinal performance of all participants in the same experimental session|similar to the scoreboard in many popular video games. In the next stage, all students were afforded the opportunity to practice solving mazes at a fixed, randomly determined cost per maze. In addition, children in the treatment group could pay to publically slime the screen of any practicing peer. Sliming another student's screen carried no monetary benefit, but it blocked a portion of the maze on which the respective participant was working, thereby negating the benefits of practicing for her. In the third and last stage of the game, students were asked to solve more dicult mazes and were rewarded with a piece rate for each one they successfully completed. At no point during the experiment did monetary payoffs depend on ordinal rank.
Among children in the control group we observe that, conditional on actual performance in the first stage, children who were paired with better peers and, therefore, find themselves closer to the bottom of the distribution are, if anything, more likely to invest in becoming better at solving mazes. This is not the case in the treatment group. Being able to publicly slime their peers, lower-ranked students substitute away from practicing and pay to disrupt others instead.

Perversely, the very children who would ordinarily practice more to overcome their relative disadvantage chose to act out instead.

So, students select bad behaviors after realizing their low rank.

Observational study:

To provide additional evidence on the relationship between ordinal rank and student outcomes, we use administrative data from New York City Public Schools (NYCPS). Our research design for these data exploits transitions from elementary to middle school, i.e., from fifth to sixth grade. We estimate that a fifty percentile decrease in rank among schoolmates is associated with as much as a 2.5 percentage point increase in the probability of a serious behavioral incident.



#school
#economics
#small-fish-big-fish
#frog-pond
#motivation








# Carrell et al. 2013

Pairing a low ability student with a high ability student does not increase the low ability student’s success.

Recently, Carrell et al. (2013) present perplexing evidence from a randomized field experiment designed to boost the achievement of low-ability freshmen at the US Air Force Academy. Based on earlier, experimental estimates indicating nonlinear, positive effects of peers' mean test scores, the authors “optimally" constructed peer groups by pairing low-ability students with a greater share of high-ability ones. Contrary to the authors' expectations, however, the intervention had a negative and statistically significant effect on the very students it was designed to help. That is, if anything, “better" classmates led to slightly worse outcomes. Carrell et al. (2013) note that within their “optimally" designed peer groups, low-ability students avoided the very peers with whom they were intended to interact and instead formed more homogeneous subgroups.



#school
#economics
#motivation
#small-fish-big-fish
#frog-pond




















# Enkavi et al. 2019 “Large-scale analysis of test-retest”

Self-report measures of self-regulation have strong test-retest reliability. Behavioral measures do not. Behavioral measures, therefore, may not be valid measures of stable, self-reg individiual differences.


#measurement
#test-retest
#attitudes-vs-behaviors









# Jordan, Sterling, et al. 2019 “Examining long-term trends in politics … “

Trump’s rhetoric isn’t out of the ordinary. Over the last several decades, political leaders have increasingly used confidence rather than analytical thinking.


#trump
#text-analysis
#political-psych










# Lindsay et al., 2019 “Mindfulness training reduces loneliness … “

Mindfulness interventions, which train skills in monitoring present-moment experiences with an orientation of acceptance, have shown promise for improving social-relationship processes. This study demonstrates the efficacy of a 2-wk smartphone-based mindfulness training for reducing loneliness and increasing social contact in daily life. Importantly, this study shows that developing an orientation of acceptance toward present-moment experiences is a critical mechanism for mitigating these social risk factors.


#mindfullness
#social-isolation
#intervention















# de Melo et al., 2019 “Human cooperation when acting through autonomous machine … “

When you program a car to complete a social dilemma, compared to when you complete one yourself, you are more likely to be cooperative. We show that this happens because programming causes selfish short-term rewards to become less salient, leading to considerations of broader societal goals.


#cooperation
#bots
#autonomous-vehicles
#future-of-work








# Gold et al., 2019 “Musical reward prediction errors engage … “

Prediction errors are crucial for perception, learning, and adaptability. Can they also explain the abstract pleasures we derive from seemingly nonadaptive behaviors?

Enjoying music reliably ranks among life’s greatest pleasures. Like many hedonic experiences, it engages several reward-related brain areas, with activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) most consistently reflecting the listener’s subjective response. Converging evidence suggests that this activity arises from musical “reward prediction errors” (RPEs) that signal the difference between expected and perceived musical events, but this hypothesis has not been directly tested.

Counterpoint suggesting that the study is wrong:
https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1913244116



#fmri
#well-being
#prediction-errors
#cognitive-psych









# political correctness at the best journals and funding agencies

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/10/forbidden-questions.html

At NIH and NSF, research that goes against the political orthodoxy will not get funded.
At journals, research that goes against the political orhtodoxy will not get published.

#woke
#woke-journals
#social-justice-academia
#bad-science
#nsf-woke
#nih-woke














# Kremen et al. 2019 “Influence of young adult cognitive ability … “

Cognitive ability is everything. Extra education doesn’t improve your midlife functioning. Early adult cognitive ability accounts for midlife functioning and educational achievement.


#intelligence
#cognitive-decline










# Rozek et al., 2019 “Reducing socioeconomic disparities … “

Low income students find school tests stressful. Fewer low-income students failed a STEM test after an emotion-regulation intervention, relative to the control group.

#mindsets
#intervention
#school
#well-being

























# Zissman & Ganzach, 2020

Intelligence contributes 50-90 times more than grit to educational success and 13 times more to job-market success. Conscientiousness contrubtes twice as much than grit.


#intelligence
#grit



















####

#SJW

####

























# The Myth of Pervasic Misogyny
Clark & Winegard, 2020

https://quillette.com/2020/07/27/the-myth-of-pervasive-misogyny/

Society is not biased in favor of men. Here are a bunch of examples where men are worse off:

Men are more likely to be
- victims of crime
- homeless
- commit suicide
- die on job
- die in combat
- shorter life expectancy
- worse education
- shorter education
- receive longer sentences for equal crime
- denounced as job candidates when applying for tenure-track positions

In OP and psych research, people often claim implicit bias from social experiments. Present participants with an essay. If written by a man, they evaluate it positively. If written by a woman, they evaluate it negatively.

But you can find evidence of the opposite bias as well. The "direction of the bias" is all-over-the-place/not robust/wavering...just like attributions research.

When people read about research claiming that males have a favorable trait (e.g., truthful), they evaluate it as wrong or biased. When people read about research claiming that females have a favorable trait (e.g., truthful), they evaluate it as as empirically valid.

Participants find female-favoring "studies" to be more important, plausible, and well-conducted relative to male-favoring "studies."

Participants are told that a college entrance exam is accurate at predicting college performance. If told that women outperform men on the test, then students endorse its use. If told that men outperform women, then students do not endorse its use.

Participants are much more likely to favor silencing pro-male content relative to pro-female content.

People care much more about "female structural problems" compared to "male structural problems."

People have more sympathy for female suffering.

"
Concerns about women’s wellbeing are so strong that researchers often frame pro-female preferences and biases as harmful to women. For example, in a series of studies led by Lily Jampol, researchers asked participants to evaluate essays and give feedback to the author. Participants who then discovered the essay writer was female were more likely to adjust their performance evaluations upward than participants who were told the essay writer was male. This paper was entitled “The Dark Side of White Lies in the Workplace: Feedback to Women Is Upwardly Distorted,” highlighting the potentially harmful consequences of providing softened or distorted feedback to women.
"



#sjw
#male-female-bias
#misogyny-myth



















# The queen bee effect

Advanced career female academics are more likely than their male counterparts to underestimate the career commitment of women at the beginning of their academic careers relative to advanced males.

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bjso.12408


#sjw
#misogyny-myth





























# Henderson, 2019

https://quillette.com/2019/11/16/thorstein-veblens-theory-of-the-leisure-class-a-status-update/

The elite now use beliefs as a new status symbol. They are fashionable and cost little to the rich, but damage the lower class.

He calls this the "luxury belief class."

Money isn't everything. Relative rank is. Status is. Today, status is conveyed through espoused beliefs.

"
Your typical middle-class American could not tell you what “heteronormative” or “cisgender” means. But if you visit Harvard, you’ll find plenty of rich 19-year-olds who will eagerly explain them to you. When someone uses the phrase “cultural appropriation,” what they are really saying is “I was educated at a top college.” Consider the Veblen quote, “Refined tastes, manners, habits of life are a useful evidence of gentility, because good breeding requires time, application and expense, and can therefore not be compassed by those whose time and energy are taken up with work.” Only the affluent can afford to learn strange vocabulary because ordinary people have real problems to worry about.
"

"
Affluent people promote open borders or the decriminalization of drugs because it advances their social standing, not least because they know that the adoption of those policies will cost them less than others. The logic is akin to conspicuous consumption—if you’re a student who has a large subsidy from your parents and I do not, you can afford to waste $900 and I can’t, so wearing a Canada Goose jacket is a good way of advertising your superior wealth and status. Proposing policies that will cost you as a member of the upper class less than they would cost me serve the same function. Advocating for open borders and drug experimentation are good ways of advertising your membership of the elite because, thanks to your wealth and social connections, they will cost you less than me.
"

AN EXAMPLE OF PROGRESSIVE BELIEFS BY ELITES HARMING THE LOWER CLASS:

"
Unfortunately, the luxury beliefs of the upper class often trickle down and are adopted by people lower down the food chain, which means many of these beliefs end up causing social harm. Take polyamory. I had a revealing conversation recently with a student at an elite university. He said that when he sets his Tinder radius to five miles, about half of the women, mostly other students, said they were “polyamorous” in their bios. Then, when he extended the radius to 15 miles to include the rest of the city and its outskirts, about half of the women were single mothers. The costs created by the luxury beliefs of the former are borne by the latter. Polyamory is the latest expression of sexual freedom championed by the affluent. They are in a better position to manage the complications of novel relationship arrangements. And if these relationships don’t work out, they can recover thanks to their financial capability and social capital. The less fortunate suffer by adopting the beliefs of the upper class.

This is well-illustrated by the finding that in 1960 the percentage of American children living with both biological parents was identical for affluent and working-class families—95 percent. By 2005, 85 percent of affluent families were still intact, but for working-class families the figure had plummeted to 30 percent.

The Harvard political scientist Robert Putnam at a Senate hearing said, “Rich kids and poor kids now grow up in separate Americas…Growing up with two parents is now unusual in the working class, while two-parent families are normal and becoming more common among the upper middle class.” Upper-class people, particularly in the 1960s, championed sexual freedom. Loose sexual norms spread throughout the rest of society. The upper class, though, still have intact families. They experiment in college and then settle down later. The families of the lower class fell apart. Today, the affluent are among the most likely to display the luxury belief that sexual freedom is great, though they are the most likely to get married and least likely to get divorced.
"

So, elites believe in sexual freedom. No need to promote the nuclear family. That works for rich. It's terrible for the poor.

"
The affluent do not want to be seen with “common” goods. They view them as distasteful. Today, it’s not just common goods they view as distasteful—it’s beliefs too. The affluent, dreading an “odious” designation, resist displaying commonplace beliefs. Those beliefs are for the little people. Instead, the upper class want to be seen displaying luxury beliefs.
"

I like pizza hut. Some snobby elites would look down on me for liking pizza hut. Same thing with beliefs.



#sjw
#luxury-beliefs
















# Douthat, 2020

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/18/opinion/sunday/white-fragility-meritocracy.html

All of this "white-fragility" talk is standing on the shoulders of a longer-lasting effect: the overproduction of elites. Too many highly educated. Too many PhDs. Too few jobs for them. They are exhausted with meritocracy, even though meritocracy is their field. Then a movement comes along that says, "hey you can denounce all that testing and just say it's white supremacy. It's racist." Now the depressed and exhausted highly educated but unemployed person has an excuse. His or her life becomes easier. Moreover, she stands to benefit from reducing meritocracy slightly because she couldn't get a job in the first place.


#sjw
#overproduction-of-elites


























# Sheppard et al. "stress-relieving" obhdp




Article about positive effects of workplace flirting



#flirting
#sjw
#sexual-harassment












# action bias, attribution theory, red tape, and brooks law

red tape / beuro / committee
People want to add committees, paperwork, more performance reviews, etc. More red-tape seems to be current generation's go-to solution tool.

Brook's law and coordination mis-estimation
People under-estimate the coordination demand of adding more people (under-estimate coordination problem of diversity) to a project. 

Information overload solutions
People recommend more and more tools to deal with information overload (youtube channels on second brain). They never recommend, but should, stepping away from information entirely. I do not need a super-amazing tool if I'm only dealing with three books. I do not need a crazy schedule app if I'm only dealing with one other person. 

Systems dynamics
People focus either exclusively on inflow or outflow, rarely on both. (finance: how to increase my income rather than reduce my outflow. OB: how to improve the quality of incoming theory but not remove theory).

Attribution theory and trolley problems
People say, "that's his own fault" more readily if the problem seems self-inflicted (obesity) compared to random-event-inflicted (wheel-chair due to birth defect). 
[i'm not getting this right...]People think actively pushing someone off a bridge to save a trolley is worse than not acting. 

Energize behavior by removing constraints, not adding demands. 
Manipulating behavior is about removing barriers and setting defaults, not forcing one way or another. 

Filtering & Ackerman
Ackerman's new intelligence: deal with the internet. Something he did not mention: you need to be able to filter and remove clutter.

Arthur Schopenhaur
“The art of not reading is a very important one. It consists in not taking an interest in whatever may be engaging the attention of the general public at any particular time. When some political or ecclesiastical pamphlet, or novel, or poem is making a great commotion, you should remember that he who writes for fools always finds a large public. A precondition for reading good books is not reading bad ones: for life is short.”
― Arthur Schopenhauer, Essays and Aphorisms

logic and failure
beer game
=> people try to intervene when intervening is unnecessary
I show one step further:
people show stronger preferences for...
trying to intervene but making things worse
over
doing nothing [and things stay the same, or things get worse]

Woke marketing
If you don't go see this movie, you are supporting the narrative that CC people can't lead in movies. 
[used by wakanda forever crowd]

#action-bias
#pg-red-tape
#systems-dynamics
#pg-brooks-law
#grouped-ideas
#motivation













# Wei, Mo, Liu, Meng, 2020 “Man’s persuit of meaningfulness


When Task A unexpectedly terminates and you lose all progress, then you have more autonomous motivation for unrelated and irrelevant Task B.


Shin and Grant 2019 showed that boredom on task A increased interest and engagement on task B. They argued for a compensation effect. Similarly, this study argues and finds a compensation effect for meaningfulness between task A and task B. When task A is interrupted and all your experimental data deleted/lost (thus, the meaning of your work suddenly disappears), then you engage in more autonomous motivation (as measured by brain activity, not behavior) in a subsequent irrelevant activity.

While meaningful work is fundamental and beneficial both to the employees and to the organization, it is not uncommon that a work project got terminated and the meaning of work suddenly disappeared. In the work setting, people normally work on multiple tasks in a row. Thus, unexpected termination of a preceding task might have a non-negligible impact on one’s autonomous motivation in an ensuing task. To explore this effect in an experimental setting, participants were asked to work on two different tasks in two experimental sessions, respectively. In addition, a between-subject experimental design
was adopted, and participants in the experimental group (but not the control group) encountered unexpected program quits by the end of Session 1. Success rates during Session 1 were comparable between the two groups, and no confounding factors were introduced to this study. We resorted to the magnitude of RewP in the win–lose difference wave to measure one’s autonomous motivation during Session 2 and observed a more pronounced
RewP in the experimental group. This finding suggested that one has a pursuit of meaning, and that the disappearance of the meaning of work enhanced one’s autonomous motivation.

Thoughts / keywords
- neither activity was truly meaningful. both stupid lab tasks
- two independent tasks, not repeated measures
- brain activity to measure autonomous motivation
- wouldn’t terminated work piss you off and make you remove yourself from subsequent tasks? perhaps a moderator is autonomy to be able to not do the subsequent task
- notice that all we can do is “at the next time point, X goes up slightly.” Really? That’s the best we have? This is a snapshot, not the flow of behavior



#academic-fluff
#amj-reading
#boredom


















# Baronchelli 2018 “the emergence of consensus”

What are some factors that often generate consensus?
- centralized institutions

+ authority: enforces order and punishes violators
+ leadership: persuadors, connectors, experts
+ broadcasting: climates and cultures
+ incentives or rewards for collective coordination
+ feedback: if informed about population-level popularity, you will adapt

- interaction effects

+ communication: early players can explain benefits of cooperation to latecomers
+ peer punishment of deviators
+ environment punishment: driving on the wrong side of the road kills you
+ conformity bias: humans inherently conform
+ quorum sensing: agents share a pre-defined response once they perceive a threshold



#consensus
#emergence
#networks
#collective-action
















#
#
#
# may 2023 thinking and article reading





Another route to reading
authors
- diefendorf
- gabriel
- nikos
- brent scott
- remy
- rosen
- lanaj




if just a daily ESM study, you need self and other reports
If just a one-perspective/rater study, you need an ESM plus a vignette manipulation
Or, if just daily ESM, you need morning to capture "last night X happend" and evening to capture "today at work, Y happened"



best papers to consider and re-read in this set

deifendorf EE
kundo 
bush workplace intrusions / to what do I owe this visit?
elizabeth campbell above the law for blm manipulations of students





# transparency statements

[diefendorft. from larger study. nothing available. not pre-registered]

Approval for this study, titled “Experiences of Call Center Em- ployees,” was granted by the University of Akron Institutional Review Board (IRB no. 20180512). This study is the first publication from a larger data collection effort in the United States, and we adhered to the Journal of Applied Psychology methodological check- list in writing this article. All data collection occurred prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and there was no preregistration. Although the data are not available, code for all analyses will be made available by the authors upon request. Data were analyzed using SPSS Version 27 (IBM Corporation) and Mplus Version 8.8 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998–2017).




















# Lee, Diefendorff et al. "emotional exhaustion across the workday"


INTRO / HOOK

Emotional exhaustion is important.
The observation that EE is tied to the dynamic balance of resource expenditure and resource replenishment has led researchers to adopt a within-person perspective.
Most of the existing research has ignored the possibility of systematic (i.e., directional) changes in EE over time. Responding to calls to incorporate time in theorizing and research (Mitchell & James, 2001; Monge, 1990), we argue that the workday is a meaningful span of time over which systematic changes in EE are likely to occur. Many psychological constructs may not only fluctuate up and down but also exhibit predictable change patterns over the workday. 

One objective of the current investigation is to provide the first empirical test of workday EE growth curves, which are defined by their intercepts (i.e., EE at the start of the day) and slopes (i.e., systematic changes in EE over the day). Based on recovery research suggesting that individuals replenish their resources during personal time when away from work (Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007), we expected that individuals would typically start the workday at relatively low levels of EE. However, based on COR theory and the idea that the effort exerted to meet emotional demands accumulates over time to produce EE (Bakker & Demerouti, 2007; Kammeyer-Mueller et al., 2016), we expected to observe systematic increases in EE throughout the workday.

Beyond establishing the existence of workday EE growth curves, we theorized that these growth curves would exhibit between- and within-person variability; specifically, that people will differ in how emotionally exhausted they typically start their workday (i.e., workday intercept) and how their EE typically changes over the workday (i.e., workday slope). 

[christopher; "no one has looked at X yet" argument]
So, EE is important
Beginning to assess within person effects
No one has examined growth curves. 


JUSTIFY DAY LEVEL LENS

Dunford et al. (2012) used growth curve modeling to examine how EE developed over 2 years and found a small negative slope,

Although these studies observed systematic changes in EE over months or years for specific groups of employees (e.g., organiza- tional newcomers) or the broader context (e.g., an economic boom), more work is needed to understand whether and in what ways EE might systematically change over shorter and more commonly experienced timeframes. We argue that the typical work shift or workday is a psychologically salient and meaningful span of time in the lives of nearly all employees (Benedetti et al., 2015). The workday is often clearly marked by the time of day, distinct physical location (Ashforth et al., 2000), and clear role transition periods occurring during the commute (Nolan et al., in press). These features mean that the workday is likely a very well-defined unit of time in the minds of most employees, especially as it contrasts with time at home and the activities and roles one enacts in that domain. Because of these features—and the fact that the workday is embedded in a 24-hr cycle of work and home—we theorized that EE should exhibit a predictable change pattern during the workday, starting off relatively low and steadily increasing over the day.

THEORY OF EE CHANGE ACROSS THE WORKDAY

Work day requires effort, and then individuals replenish their resources at home. This cycle of using resources during work (Hobfoll, 1989) and replenishing resources after work is thought to produce a 24-hr pattern in which employee energy is relatively high at the start of the workday but exhibits decline over the course of the day (Hülsheger, 2016).

Reflecting low levels of emotional energy, EE should exhibit a pattern in which it is relatively low at the beginning of the workday (because of sleep and recovery activities at home) and systematically increases over the workday (as effort is expended).

OVERLAP WITH HULSHEGER

H finds that fatigue also grows over the course of the day. 


METHOD

100ish people completing up to 16 workday surveys, 3 measures per day.
Not everyone completed 16 (you don't need full data for growth curves).
It looks like the average number of waves was 8.
Call center or service employees

Surveys
- 30 minutes before shift
- during lunch break
- 30 minutes before shift ended
- Emotional Exhaustion, three items, three times per day
Right now (strongly disagree, strongly agree)
I feel emotionally drained
I feel used up
I feel burned out
- Prior Evening Detachment, several items, once per day
Think about last night and rate agreement (strongly disagree, strongly agree)
I forgot about work
I didn't think about work at all
I distanced myself from work
I got a break from the demands of work
- Within day socializing, several items, measured twice per day
1 not at all, 6 to a very large extent
Consider time since start of shift to now (or since mid shift to end of shift)
I socialized with others
I spent time with/talking to friends
- Within day customer mistreatment, completed once at mid-shift
10 items (0 = never, 4 = all the time)
Items from Wang et al., 2011, like "demanded special treatment"

Ran a simple growth model (intercept and slope) on EE. 
Regress EE intercept and slope on the above day-level predictors. 

Then, run another growth model to get between person intercept and slope
regress between person intercept on between / person level ivs, (same for slope)

BP / person level predictors
Perceived supervisor support
Autonomoous motivation
Controlled motivation


They stacked their data in a weird way.
Captured measures 3 times a day, but rather than look at all of those measures over time, they stacked measures to start of shift, mid day, and end of shift (regardless of day). 




CHRISTOPHER SUMMARY

[christopher summary]
EE is important. EE within person view becoming popular. We look at EE growth over a day.
EE should start (because of home replenishment) low and increase during work (because of resource demands). 
Contribution: tests theoretically implied but empirically untested idea that EE increaes over the day




#jap
#ob-reading
#ob
#mimic
#mimic-timeframe
#mimic-timeframing











# lee, koopman, rosen, gabriel "when, why, and for whom is receiving help actually helpful?"

A huge finding from their study that they completely downplay because it is not politically correct: men don't care if you give them nonempowering help (i just did it for you). Women feel far less competent if you give them nonempowering help (i'll just do it for you) compared to empowering help (i'll teach you how to do it). 



How many times are people going to write the "when is help useful vs not useful" for giver and receiver? Ugh.

INTRO / HOOK

An important assumption of the helping literature is that when help is provided, it facilitates work (Organ, 1997). Indeed, under this assumption, helping others is widely encouraged (Koopman, Rosen, et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018). However, the sparse literature focused on help recipients provides reason to believe that this experience may be detrimental to recipients’ perceived competence (i.e., Bolino et al., 2004; Deelstra et al., 2003; Thompson & Bolino, 2018). This disconnect was the focus of our current research, and our aim was to build consensus between the two contrasting arguments. Our thesis was that rather than debating whether receiving help is beneficial, a more fruitful activity is to instead examine when receiving help is beneficial versus is not beneficial (i.e., whether help is perceived as empowering vs. none- mpowering), and for whom.



Receiving empowering help (helped me by showing me how to do it)
Receiving nonempowering help (helped me by doing the work him/herself)

The second makes you feel less competent and forces you to withdraw.




STUDY 1 ESM

110 participants. 
Midday survey (help received and perceived competence)
End of day survey (work goal progress, withdrawal)
How many days? They do not say

Midday survey
- empowering help received
Coworker helped me with a difficult assignment by teaching me how to do it
- nonempowering help received
Coworker helped me with a difficult assignment by doing the work him/herself
- competence
Since arriving at work, I have felt competent in my job

End of work
- work goal progress
- withdrawal


Receiving empowering help is associated with percepveid competence, which then predicted work goal progress.


STUDY 2 RECALL A TIME

Prolific
Randomly assign to "recall empowering help" or "recall nonempowering help"

All participants were asked to recall a situation within the past 3 weeks where “a coworker helped you with your heavy workload, with a difficult assignment, or some other work- related problem.” Participants were then randomly told either “: : : and you were an interactive participant in this episode. That is, your coworker helped you by showing/teaching you how to deal with the issue/problem you were having” (empowering help received) or “: : : and you were a passive participant in this episode. That is, your coworker helped you by doing the work her/himself” (nonempowering help received). Participants then wrote about this interaction. We directed participants in their writing to discuss the interaction in detail (i.e., what they needed help with, who the person was that helped, where the interaction took place), as remembering specific details facilitates recall.

DVs
Survey mesaures
Competence (immediately following the interaction you wrote about, "I felt competent")
Manipulation checks of empowering and nonempowering help


STUDY 3 Vignette

Prolific


Participants were asked to imagine themselves as an analyst at Wooli Corporation, a fictional company that sells wholesale products to retailers. Participants read the same background vignette (available at OSF) which described a situation in which they had to create a report for their supervisor using software they were not familiar with. After reading this background information, participants were randomly assigned to a scenario in which they interacted with a colleague and received either (a) empowering or (b) nonempowering help. Participants interacted with a coworker (Pat) who was familiar with the software in both conditions. In the empowering help condition, Pat worked with the participant, answered questions, and offered helpful tips and suggestions. In the nonempowering help condition, Pat did the work while the participant passively observed. Participants then answered items about their perceived competence and manipulation checks.







#mimic-study
#jap
#ob

































# wee "jolted: how task-based jolts disrupt status"

When employees have higher initial status, a task-based jolt is appraised as more self-threatening, which reduces their concern for others and undermines their generosity, ultimately leading them to lose status. Whereas, when employees have lower initial status, a task-based jolt is appraised as an opportunity, which bolsters their group-based self-esteem and increases their generos- ity, ultimately leading them to gain status.


Vignette study

Imagine you are a community college instructor

Participants were asked to imagine that they were employed as an instructor for a community college in May 201811 and were given background information about their purported job. This information included the following: (a) they were part of a five-member teaching group at the college; (b) they and their group focused on in-person teaching; (c) although teaching effectiveness and performance were assessed individually, members of the teaching group inter- acted frequently with each other, coordinating and sharing resources in order to be more successful in their content delivery and teaching effectiveness; and (d) members of the teaching group benefited from sharing teaching resources and information on class management. Next, depending on the randomly assigned condition, participants read about their status in the group and about a strategic decision made by the head of the college (task-based jolt manipulation).

You are high or low status

In the higher status condition, participants received the following information:
You are one of the higher status members of your teaching group. You generally have higher teaching ratings than other members of your teaching group and you have won awards for your teaching effective- ness. Therefore, you receive more respect, admiration, and regard than other members of the group.
In the lower status condition participants received the following information:
You are one of the lower status members of your teaching group. You generally have lower teaching ratings than other members of your teaching group and you have not won awards for your teaching effectiveness. Therefore, you receive less respect, admiration, and regard than other members of the group.

Switch to online teaching as a task jolt

After reading the status manipulation, participants read an announcement from the head of the college, supposedly sent 2 weeks before the start of the semester, which outlined the college’s organizational response to new competitors in the local market and economic factors for the college. In the jolt condition, the head announced the decision to move most classes online for the coming school semester:
The Head of the college sees the continuation of in-person classes to be unsustainable and views a quick transition to online teaching as a critical change ::: when you compare the new requirements for online teaching to your previous in-person teaching experience, you realize that you will need to make significant adjustments to the way you teach.
In the no-jolt condition, the head announced the decision to continue in-person classes for the coming school semester:
The Head of the college sees the continuation of in-person classes to be sustainable and views a quick transition to online teaching as an unnecessary change : : : when you compare the current requirements for in-person teaching to your previous in-person teaching experience, you realize that you will NOT need to make significant adjustments to the way you teach.

DV measures
- self threatening of jolt
- view jolt as opportunity
- self vs other concern
- generosity intentions

Yolk

Get a new group of participants. Read about Bob Smith (whether high or low status, whether switch to online or not). Read about Bob's answers to generosity intentions and individual learning. 

Then, answer this question (status conferral)
I have high regard for Bob
I look up to Bob
Bob is an asset to the group



[christopher summary]

High status and jolt to task = I feel threatened
I rate myself as less likely to be generous and less likely to learn

Others see my scores. They respect me less. 


Theory stuff
- status hierarchies tend to be stable
- one way they become unstable: when a task jolt occurs, a disruption of normal operating procedures
- high status people feel threatened by this
- low status people feel it represents an opportunity (for them to finally gain some status)




#ob
#jap
#vignette
















# Have You Earned Your Tomorrow
Edgar Guest

Is anybody happier because you passed his way?
Does anyone remember that you spoke to him today?
This day is almost over, and its toiling time is through;
Is there anyone to utter now a kindly word of you?

Did you give a cheerful greeting to the friend who came along?
Or a churlish sort of “Howdy” and then vanish in the throng?
Were you selfish pure and simple as you rushed along the way,
Or is someone mighty grateful for a deed you did today?

Can you say tonight, in parting with the day that’s slipping fast,
That you helped a single brother of the many that you passed?
Is a single heart rejoicing over what you did or said;
Does a man whose hopes were fading now with courage look ahead?

Did you waste the day, or lose it, was it well or sorely spent?
Did you leave a trail of kindness or a scar of discontent?
As you close your eyes in slumber do you think that God would say,
You have earned one more tomorrow by the work you did today?


#poem
#quote
#philosophy




















# Bartels & Wellman, "is it just me or am I the people's choice?"


THEORY / HOOK

Leadership is important.
Recently, people have focused on informal leadership.
Leader identity construction theory: people claim and grant for leadership identity
What we don't know: different forms of incongruence between my self identification as a leader and my teammates agreement in identifying me as a leader. 

Identity incongruence = stress appraisal
Identity congruence = challenge appraisal

Identity incongruence = I see myself as a leader but others do not
- I'm a nurse who gives advice about how to do stuff, and my coworkers like me doing so
- congruence perceptions = viewed as my investment is worth it because it will be rewarded in the environment

Individuals experiencing identity congruence are likely to infer, based on the supportive granting behavior they observe, that other members of the team validate and encourage them to pursue their individually held leader or follower identities. With leader identity congruence, in- dividuals are likely to perceive that their personal goals of motivating and directing others and building leadership skills are facilitated by the supportive responses and behavioral grants of leadership they receive at the dyadic and team levels.

On the other hand, identity incongruence is stressful. 

Individuals who experience incongruence between their personally held identities as a leader or follower and how others identify them are likely to infer, due to others’ reluctance to grant them their preferred identity, that this identity is threatened.

I claim by offering opinions or sitting at the head of the table, but others ignore me or exclude me or roll their eyes at me. 



METHOD

Qualtrics participants

Read business scenario (working as part of a team developing annual survey)

You are an employee at the Westgate Group—a marketing firm that offers various consulting and marketing services to its clients. You have been working with the firm for about two years and have generally enjoyed the work that you do. The company is organized so that everyone works in teams. There are no formal, internal leaders of the team; only a management team that oversees all of the marketing teams. You work at the company headquarters that features an open office floor place where people work in a shared space which is a good thing because there are a lot of interactions among your team members and you feel that all of the team members know each other well.

Once a year, management asks your team to complete a survey focused on personal development. One part of this survey will ask you to think about yourself as a leader and ask all of your team members about you as well. The great part about your company is that you do not have to be identified as a leader to be promoted; there are other ways to be promoted as well. This information is just used as a personal develop- ment tool. As you ponder the upcoming survey, you think about two things: 1) what you will write about yourself and 2) what other members of the team will write about you.

Manipulate self identification

High Self-Identification. As you think about your personal development, you are very confident that your role and identity on the team are generated by your ability to really energize other team members to achieve their best and inspire the team to go beyond their own self-interests and focus on the good of the team. You also believe that your identity on the team is related to leadership and you are confident in your ability to prioritize getting others on the team to identify with the team’s central mission.
Low Self-Identification. As you think about your personal development, you are very confident that you energize yourself to achieve your best and inspire yourself to work on your part for the good of the team. Energizing and inspiring others are not a part of your identity on the team but you do an excellent job of completing your part of the team’s projects. You are also very confident that your identity on the team is not at all related to leadership; instead, you prioritize making sure that you understand the team’s central mission and let others work
through their own process to understand the team’s central mission.

Manipulate other identification. (participants received one of the four)

High Dyadic Other-Identification. As you think about how Taylor (another team member) will fill out the form about you, you are very confident that Taylor will focus on your ability to really energize other team members to achieve their best and inspire the team to go beyond their own self-interests and focus on the good of the team. You are also really confident that Taylor will highlight that your identity on the team is related to leadership and that you prioritize getting the others on the team to identify with the team’s central mission.

Low Dyadic Other-Identification. As you think about how Taylor (another team member) will fill out the form about you, you are very confident that Taylor will talk about how you energize yourself to achieve your best and inspire yourself to work on your part for the good of the team. Taylor will definitely recognize that energizing and inspiring other team members are not at all a part of your identity of the team but that you do an excellent job of completing your part of the team’s projects. Taylor likely also believes that your identity on the team is not at all related to leadership; instead, Taylor is very confident that you prioritize making sure that you understand the team’s central mission and let others work through their own process to understand the team’s central mission.

High Team Other-Identification. As you think about how the rest of the team will fill out the form about you, you are very confident that the entire team is likely to focus on your ability to really energize other team members to achieve their best and inspire the team to go beyond their own self-interests and focus on the good of the team. You are also really confident that the entire team will highlight that your identity on the team is related to leadership and that you prioritize getting the others on the team to identify with the team’s central mission.

Low Team Other-Identification. As you think about how the entire team will fill out the form about you, you are very confident that the entire team will talk about how you energize yourself to achieve your best and inspire yourself to work on your part for the good of the team. The entire team will definitely recognize that energizing and inspiring other team members are not at all a part of your identity of the team but that you do an excellent job of completing your part of the team’s projects. The team also believes that your identity on the team is not at all related to leadership; instead, the entire team is very confident that you prioritize making sure that you understand the team’s central mission and let others work through their own process to understand the team’s central mission.

DVs
Self assess surveys
Hindrance appraisal
Challenge appraisal



#vignette
#ob
#jap

















# kundro "performance pressure amplifies the effect of evening detachment on next morning shame"



Getting away from work in the evening has been linked to less fatigue, less emotional exhaustion, and more engagement at work the next day.

But there is a trade-off: in high performance, results-oriented work environments, high evening detachment will cause employees to feel shameful.

detachment + high performance pressure work -> next morning shame -> workday cheating behavior

Theory
- social self-preseveration: individuals experience shame after socially inappropriate behaviors. At high performance places, detachment is inappropriate


EXCELLENT ESM METHOD MIMIC. 


Between person measures.
Evening survey
Morning survey
Afternoon survey
All captured by one individual



STUDY 1

ESM, two weeks. Justified nicely. Described nicely.

Surveys

- Performance Pressure, baseline, three items
In my workplace
pressures for performance are high
if I dont' produce at high levels, my job will be at risk
I feel a tremendous pressure to produce results

- Psych detatchment, daily evening
This evening, I
detached from work
didn't think about work
distanced myself from work

- shame, daily morning
Thinking about last night, I feel ashamed about
the amount of time I spent not working
the degree to which I detached from work
the extent to which I distanced myself from work

- workday cheating, daily afternoon survey
At work today
made it look like I was working even when I wasn't
created the impression that I was workign harder than I really was
misrepresented my work activities to make it seem like I was being productive




Study 1 demonstrated that, on average, the more an employee exceeded their baseline level of detachment in a given evening, the more shame they experienced at work the next morning. In turn, the experience of morning shame was associated with increased cheat- ing or “covering-up” behaviors throughout the workday. However, the relationship between evening detachment and morning shame— and thus the capacity for evening detachment to result in workday cheating behavior—was contingent upon performance pressure.


STUDY 2 Vignette

Mturk

They manipulate performance pressure and detachment by using a vignette. 
Then ask questions about shame and cheating behavior. 
- 'HOW MUCH SHAME DO YOU IMAGINE THAT YOU WOULD FEEL'
- 'HOW MUCH CHEATING DO YOU IMAGINE THAT YOU WOULD ENGAGE IN?'

ASK KUNDRO for these vignettes








#ob
#jap
#mimic-study
#mimic-measures
#mimic-esm









# li et al., "My boss is younger, less educated, and shorter tenured"


In modern workplaces, sometimes supervisors are younger than their subordinate workers. How does this status incongruence relate to workplace consequences?

When the supervisor is competent, subordinates do not care whether he is older/younger (status incongruence).
When the supervisor is incompetent, then subordinates feel psychological threat and anxiety that the system they are in is flawed. 

When the less competent supervisor possesses status markers (e.g., education, age, and tenure), subordinates can use these status markers to justify the supervisor’s position in the hierarchy and, as a result, perceive their promotion system as more fair (or at least less unfair) than when the supervisor does not have these markers.
However, when a supervisor is both less competent and status- incongruent, subordinates may find it very difficult to justify the system. Although subordinates would still want to avoid the threat of acknowledging an unfair system, supervisors’ status markers as a potential basis for system justification are not present.


#ob
#jap
#woke







# tai et al "biting the hand that feeds"

Receiving help from a high status, high competent other makes the receiver anxious (status threat).
The receiver then feels envy.
The receiver then undermines the original helper. 


#ob
#woke
#jap









# Liu & carter

To meet the ever-changing work demands in today’s organizations, new employees are often placed into existing work teams. Although research on organizational socialization has advanced our understanding of how newcomers adjust after joining a team, it remains largely unclear how team veterans navigate the same period of adjustment. Drawing upon affective events theory, we conceptualize newcomer entry into a team as a salient affective event that can trigger multiplex affective reactions among team veterans and ultimately shape team functioning (i.e., team processes and team performance). We propose that when a newcomer differs more from veterans in relational characteristics, such as trait likeability, veterans will have stronger negative affective reactions (i.e., stronger negative affect and weaker positive affect), whereas when the newcomer differs more from veterans in task-related characteristics, such as educational background, veterans will have stronger positive affective reactions (i.e., weaker negative affect and stronger positive affect) after newcomer entry. In addition, we propose that team performance prior to newcomer entry attenuates the strength of the relationships between newcomer–veteran dissimilarities and veteran affective reactions. 

How do incoming newcomers affect the vets of the team?

When a newcomer is less similar to veterans in relational attributes (i.e., attributes related to one’s interpersonal tendencies such as trait likeability), veterans will experience stronger negative affective reactions.

The entry of a relationally dissimilar newcomer carries a high degree of negative novelty because the introduction of a socially unfamiliar member into the current team can pose threats to team veterans, inducing their concerns about potential interper- sonal flux and relationship conflicts with the newcomer 

In contrast, when a newcomer is less similar to the veterans in functional attributes (i.e., attributes that are relevant for accomplishing work tasks such as educational background), veterans are likely to have stronger positive affective reactions 

The entry of a functionally dissimilar newcomer is likely to inject a high level of positive novelty into the team because their different expertise domains may stimulate information elabo- ration among team veterans, such as increased communication, learning, and information sharing from diverse perspectives.


#ob
#jap



















# lanaj, gabriel, jennings 2023 "the importance of leader recovery for leader identity and behavior"


A leader's day is depleting. 

Every minute [of a leader’s daily life] is spent grappling with strategic issues, focusing on cost reduction, devising creative approaches to new markets, beating new competitors ... They rush from meeting to meeting, check their e-mail constantly, extinguish fire after fire, and make countless phone calls ...

Unfortunately, the taxing nature of leading may hinder leaders’ ability to fully connect to their leader role, especially if they are unable to recover during off-work hours.

We propose that one way leaders can bolster their leader identity is by starting their workday feeling refreshed and restored. 


On days when leaders are replenished due to psychological detachment prior to work, they may have the desire and fortitude to immerse themselves in their leader role by identifying more strongly as a leader (e.g., Ibarra, 2015). In contrast, on days when leaders are cognitively depleted due to affect-focused rumination, they may identify less with their leader role because depletion prompts desires to avoid resource- intensive responsibilities (e.g., Sjåstad & Baumeister, 2018).


ESM Study
100 leaders
10 work days

Leader daily surveys
- psych detachment from prior night ("last night I could detach from work")
- affect focused rumination ("Last night I felt irritated when thinking about work-related issues")
- depletion ("I feel drained right now")
- leader identity ("Right now, I see myself as a leader")

Follower daily surveys
- transofmrational behaviors (communicated importance of shared goals; displayed enthusiasm)
- enacted power (got his/her subordinates to do what he/she wanted)



#ob
#jap
#esm











# bush, baer, welsh, outlaw "to what do I owe this visit?"

Literature assumes that workplace intrusions (unexpected work encounters that disrupt your work) are negative (deplete resources, role overload, promote strain). 

However, the negative effects of task switching or task interruptions might be countered by benefits from renewed work engagement. 

Non-role intrusions (coworker asking how your weekend was) disrupt work engagement.
Task intrusions (colleague updating you about task stuff) enhance work engagement

work engagement then predicts citizenship (task focused).


Although in-role intrusions may disrupt employees’ attention, the content of these work-related intrusions should align closely enough with typical work experiences that a large mental reconfiguration is not required. Consequently, the demands created from in-role intrusions should be more likely to incite role-directed action.

The authors argue that these in-task or task instrusions or in-role intrusions create useful cognitive demands that cause people to increase their attention to immediate tasks. 



EXPERIMENT

Prolific participants

Online experiment with random assignment to condition (non-role intrusions, in-role intrusions, or control). During the recruitment process, workers were told that they would be helping to validate transcription software designed for use in future research, and thus would be asked to review and provide corrections for several transcriptions. Complete 4 of these transcriptions.

To manipulate intrusions, participants were told that they would be paired with another individual who would be completing the same transcriptions at the same time, as that would provide the research team with additional confidence in the proposed corrections. 

This was actually an electronic confederate.

In-role intrusion condition
- three intrusions from E confederate ("what types of errors are you finding?")

Non-role intrusion condition
- three intrusions from E confederate ("what did you have for dinner last night?")

Participants could respond and send message back to the E confed. 

Control
- no instrusion messages sent

DVs
- self report engagement
- self report collaboration



ESM

70 employee coworker dyads

M through F surveys, once a day, for three weeks.

12noon first survey
- rate intrusions so far today

4pm second survey
- daily work engagement
- daily collaboration

4pm coworker survey, asked about focal employee
- focal employee task and person focused citizenship behavior






#ob
#mimic-study
#mimic-esm












# briker, walter, & cole, "hurry up! the role of supervisor's time urgency"

Time-urgency is thought of a useful trait for leaders -- it promotes energy, proactivity, effective action, and synchronizing efforts with others.

However, we argue that leader time urgency can have a downside for subordinates. Leaders who are time urgent may favor quick, short sided decisions, thus increasing work stress and time pressure for subordinates. 



Because time-urgent individuals experience a chronic sense of hurriedness, they eschew slow and deliberate thinking, instead basing their decisions on fast, intuitive insights (Ben-Zur & Wardi, 1994). It follows that supervisors with relatively pronounced time urgency should be more reluctant to process deviant information, and they may exhibit a rather rigid thinking style that focuses on initial ideas and solutions as opposed to careful consideration of alternatives (Streufert et al., 1981). Given their chronic perception of excessive temporal demands, these supervisors are more likely to feel that they have little time to consider subordinates’ opinions, explain man- agerial decisions in detail, or act in a fair and respectful manner (Sherf, Venkataramani, & Gajendran, 2019). Based on this logic, it seems reasonable to assume that highly time-urgent supervisors will perceive subordinates’ inputs as time-consuming distractions without much value and, thus, will disregard subordinates’ perspectives, ideas, and needs. Rather than accepting (or even soliciting) subordinates’ contributions, we therefore argue that these supervisors are more likely to dictate task assignments and push subordinates toward uniformity and compliance, setting aggressive targets and deadlines and closely monitoring subordinates’ progress.
Supervisors with relatively low time urgency, by contrast, are less likely to exhibit autocratic leadership behaviors.


Building on this foundation, we suggest that a supervisor’s autocratic leadership behavior—as triggered, for exam- ple, by his or her time urgency and high status perceptions—will create experiences of work stress (i.e., job require- ments subjectively exceeding one’s capabilities; McGrath, 1976) among subordinates. Autocratic supervisors are likely to impose intense work demands on subordinates by acting in a dominant and forceful manner, pushing sub- ordinates toward efficient task accomplishment, and forcefully maintaining high-performance expectations (De Cre- mer, 2006; Harms, Credé, Tynan, Leon, & Jeung, 2017). At the same time, autocratic leadership constrains subordi- nates’ access to important job-related resources, limiting subordinates’ opportunities for participation and involve- ment and, thus, diminishing their feelings of autonomy (De Hoogh & Den Hartog, 2009; Van Vugt et al., 2004). As noted before, the literature on job demands and resources suggests that such a combination of high demands and limited resources can be particularly damaging to individuals (e.g., Häusser et al., 2010; Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004).



STUDY
- supervisor time urgency (self report)
- supervisor autocratic leadership style (subordinate report)
- subordinate work stress (self report)
- subordinate time pressure (self report)
















# bush, welsh, baer, & waldman, "discouraging unethicality versus encouraging ethicality"

We know that ethical leadership is better than unethical leadership.

Should ethical leaders focus on "promoting the good, ethical behaviors" or "preventing/punishing immoral" behavior?

Overlay prevent/promotion theory with ethical leadership theory.



We contend that prevention-focused ethical leadership has a negative impact on daily levels of follower felt trust. To illustrate, consider a supervisor who, on a particular day, has warned an employee about the consequences of unethicality or closely monitored the employee to prevent an ethical lapse. The follower is likely to wonder what prompted the leader to engage in that behavior. Accordingly, followers on the receiving end of prevention-focused behaviors on a particular day may contemplate what prompted the increase in this behavior. Tthese followers are likely to infer that the leader is uncertain of their commitment to ethical principles and their ability to operate without oversight.



We propose that as leaders engage in promotion-focused ethical leadership on a given day, followers will interpret these promotion-focused ethical leadership behaviors in a manner that enhances daily levels of felt trust. For instance, a leader may pull aside a fol- lower to provide praise for choosing to behave ethically while completing her daily tasks. In this instance, the follower is likely to perceive that the leader has positive expectations around her willingness and motivation to make ethical choices. This daily behavior should also signal to the follower that the leader has a “state” level of confidence in the follower’s willingness and motivation to act ethically.



ESM

112 MBA students
Daily surveys for 12 work days

NOT LEADER SAMPLES. JUST SUBORDINATE EMPLOYEES MEASURED (LIKE MY BLM STUDY). 

Mid day follower survey
- asssess leader's prevention focused leadership
- assess leader's promotion focused leadership

End of day follower survey
- felt trust toward supervisor

End of day coworker survey
- rate OCBs and CWBs of focal employee



#ob
#esm












Why does misconduct often propel someone into leadership roles rather than derail their career?

Rich observed: “you can get away with whatever you want as long as you’re successful. And once you’re not so successful anymore, then all that rule-breaking and brashness doesn’t look so attractive and appealing anymore” (Barbaro, 2019).

We expect that unethical behavior has an indirect effect on employee promotability that is contingent upon their own level of performance and their supervisors’ propensity to focus on the bottom line.

Supervisors may be particularly motivated toward certain outcomes when a high-performing employee is behaving unethically as compared to a low performer.

Second, we expect bottom-line mentality (i.e., a singular focus on achieving results; Greenbaum et al., 2012) is a key supervisor attribute that governs the extent to which they face competing motives when making promotion recommendations. Supervisors higher in bottom- line mentality (BLM) do not have to cognitively contend with competing motives: the value of performance eclipses other factors, including their own judgments of employee conduct.

Theory: motivated moral reasoning

In their theory of motivated moral reasoning, Ditto et al. (2009) contend that during moral reasoning individuals maintain an “illusion of objectivity” while simultaneously behaving like “a hired gun attorney” whose cognitions are biased in ways that accord with their preferred outcomes (Ditto et al., 2009, p. 310). For example, when evaluating others’ behaviors, individuals tend to make more favor- able attributions for the behavior of people that they like (Reeder et al., 2005).

Rather than holding transgressors equally responsible, evaluators are often motivated to incorporate different standards of accountability based upon what is consistent with their preferences (Ditto et al., 1998). Thus, an identical set of behaviors could lead to vastly different moral judgment of—and accountability action for—employee misconduct.



Consistent with this view, it is easier to rationalize the severity of questionable acts from high performers by engaging in motivated moral reasoning processes. 



FIELD STUDY, SURVEY

Supervisor ratings
- punative judgement of focal employee
- promotability of focal employee

Coworker ratings of focal employee
- performance
- unethical behavior



EXPERIMENT

Mturk

After the presurvey, all participants were asked to fulfill to the role of team supervisor. Their responsibilities included review and evaluation of their team members’ work on the study tasks. Participants were put in teams where they were shown three team members who were identified by their initials and a unique color.

The task involved solving a series of anagrams containing scrambled letters that can be unscrambled to form one or more words (e.g., “rhtae” unscrambles into “earth” or “heart”).

Supervisors were instructed to review all information from the practice round of the task. Information varied each member’s performance. In the practice round, the low-performing member solved 2 of 20 anagrams on the practice round and rated low in contribution to the team debrief (M = 1.75 of 7). The average performing member solved 6 of 20 anagrams on the practice round and was peer-rated moderate in contribution to the team debrief (M = 4.25 of 7). The high-performing member solved 13 of 20 anagrams on the practice round and was peer-rated high in contri- bution to the team debrief (M = 6.75 of 7).

Next, team supervisors reviewed the task round, which counted. This entails scoring the anagram solutions of each member and reviewing their self-reported performance. Here, we manipulated the performance level of the transgressing employee (i.e., which employee overreported; see Appendix 2 for detail). After, supervisors were asked to report their judgment of the conduct of all members (i.e., punitive judgment). Following survey questions, supervisors were provided with instructions for making their final evaluations of each member. Here, we introduced the bottom-line mentality manip- ulation. Finally, supervisors were asked to what extent they endorsed each member being invited to serve in a supervisory capacity in future paid research opportunities (i.e., rate the promotability of each member).

Bottom-Line Mentality. Immediately prior to promotability evaluations of each team member, we varied bottom-line mentality in accordance with Greenbaum et al.’s (2012) definition. Specially, we encouraged supervisors to either focus on bottom-line perfor- mance in their evaluations or to not just focus on bottom-line performance (see Appendix 2 on OSF).


[christopher summary of experiment]

You are in charge of three people performing anagrams.

One is good, one is average, one is bad.
Manipulate which one is the cheater.
Manipulate participant (supervisor) bottom line mentality by priming. 

Participant (supervisor) rates employee conduct and promotability.

https://osf.io/5hxma?view_only=342cfdee8f67417594320c90d582b567



#ob
#jap
#study-mimic




















# heydarifard "losing sleep over speaking up at work"

Most studies have examined the effects of trait personality or organizational events on employee subsequent sleep.

Less work has examined insomnia antecednets that are behavior, or under the control of the employee.

The purpose of this study is to examine the effect of voice as a prosocial yet risky workplace behavior on employee sleep.



Promotive voice = energy and positive affect

Thus, engaging in promotive voice that proposes solutions intended to benefit the work unit or organization is likely to be an affectively positive experience for voicers. Also, through the expression of promotive voice, voicers focus on the pursuit of ideal future states and devising avenues for achieving those future ideals (Liang et al., 2012). This cognitive focus on an ideal future is shown to be associated with the activation of positive emotions, such as excite- ment and enthusiasm (Kark & Van Dijk, 2007; Karniol & Ross, 1996). 

Prohibitive voice = negative affect

these relate to detachment and insomnia. 




Prohibitive voice focuses on chal- lenging existing organizational practices and powerholders’ decisions without necessarily proposing solutions to address the concerns and problems identified (Liang et al., 2012), which is why it is not uncommon for voice recipients to interpret prohibitive voice as a threat to their professional expertise and an attempt to undermine their power and status (Ashford et al., 2009; Liang et al., 2012). Thus, prohibitive voice may evoke immediate negative reactions from voice recipients, such as defensiveness, expression of negative emotions, and engagement in uncivil or deviant behaviors against voicers (Ashford et al., 2009; Detert & Edmondson, 2011). Due to its content that can be perceived as antagonistic and likely adverse reactions from the recipients, prohibitive voice may put voicers at a risk of immediate negative consequences, such as face loss (losing respect and credi- bility; Detert & Edmondson, 2011; Liang et al., 2012), interpersonal harmony damage (initiating conflict and damaging relationships; Liang et al., 2012; Ward et al., 2016), and being perceived by others as a faultfinder, complainer, or troublemaker (Ashford et al., 2009; Milliken et al., 2003).
These adverse repercussions associated with prohibitive voice are likely to provoke negative emotions in voicers.



ESM

160 MBAs

10 consecutive surveys
1 morning and 1 evening

Morning survey
- depletion in prior night
- detachment in prior night
- insomnia in prior night

evening survey
- workday promotive and prohibitve voice
- workday positive and negative affect


#ob
#jap
#esm






#article-compile
#ob-reading
#literature-summary
#literature-reading
#ob-notes
























# Latane 1981 Theory of social impact

The impact of a group on an individual is proportional to the ‘strength’ of the members of the group (how credible or persuasive they are), their ‘immediacy’ (a decreasing function of their social distance from the individual), and their number N.



#social-impact
#networks






















# Oliver 1993 “Models of collective action”


The research area, “collective action,” began as the idea that individuals share an interest in keeping the collective positive. Action was the norm, inaction was weird. Now, what people mean by collective action is that CA is something people do together, and we focus on the social and organizational processes that make action possible. Identify factors that determine the forms and trajectories of action.

Most falsely claim that the size of the group, N, matters. No, what matters is whether an individual can make a noticeable difference in his provision of a collective good.

Typology of collective action models
- focus on one individual

will the individual act or contribute to the group?

- joint action of a collective

will multiple agents be able to coordinate their actions into a single joint action?

- collective decisions within a set

agents have interests and can take different actions. Which actions are most commonly chosen by all members?

- strategy between collectives

what happens in the interactions between regimes?


(1) individual decision models

act to public goal = interest * efficacy (one’s actions will make a difference in accomplshing goals)

- incentives matter
++ material: salery, insurance
++ solidary: praise, respect, friendship
++ purposive: one’s values

- costs should matter but empirically their effects are all over the place

2,3,4 short review. Not much content

## The greatest theoretical elaboration has occurred among models of the ways in which individual actions interdependently aggregate into a collective action.

## a statement about stochastic learning models

Macy (1989, 1990, 199Ia,b) has explored the effects on collective action
models of replacing the forward-looking rational actor with the backwardlooking stochastic learner. Sometimes he argues that adaptive learning is a
superior model and other times that it is an alternate model which can
sometimes be more appropriate



#collective-action
#public-goods
#formal-models










# collider bias in gender bias studies

https://twitter.com/vtraag/status/1581415880834961408

Draw a causal dag of gender bias, based on studies that find "bias against women" and "bias against men." 
Both are unfounded. 
The studies cannot support their claims. 

#anti-woke
#sjw
#gender-bias
#collider-bias
#causal-dag
#no-gender-bias-after-dag
#gender-gap
#dag









# schunk, Berger, Hermes, Winkel, & Fehr 2022 "Teaching self-regulation"

We demonstrate that the treatment increases children’s skills in terms of impulse control and self-regulation while also generating lasting improvements in academic skills such as reading and monitoring careless mistakes. Moreover, it has a substantial effect on children’s long-term school career by increasing the likelihood of enroling in an advanced secondary school track three years later. Thus, self-regulation teaching can be integrated into the regular school curriculum at low cost, is easily scalable, and can substantially improve important abilities and children’s educational career path.


#undergrad-reading
#self-regulation
#motivation
#school-interventions
#impulse-control
#testable-interventions







# the academic literature and its increasing emphasis on prejudice and social justice

https://davidrozado.substack.com/p/tialpasj

Everybody in academia is basically only studying racism sexism and gender discrimination.

#anti-woke
#rise-of-woke-studies
#woke-academia
#journals-only-publish-social-justice







# McPhail, Powers, & Tucker, 1992 “simulating individual and collective action”

Great discussion of control theory and purpose of computer simulations and formal theory.



#formal-models
#computer-simulations
#why-abm
#why-model
#benefits-of-formal













# McPhail & Tucker 1990 “Purposive collective action”

Another great discussion of control theory and computer sims


#formal-models
#why-model
#benefits-of-formal














# Castellano, Fortunato, & Loreto, 2009 “statistical physics of social”

queing discussion is good

#collective-action
#agent-based-models



















# Tizzoni et al. 2020 

https://twitter.com/mtizzoni/status/1273292534270353412?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Eembeddedtimeline%7Ctwterm%5Eprofile%3Alau_retti&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2F908799685-atari-embeds.googleusercontent.com%2Fembeds%2F16cb204cf3a9d4d223a0a3fd8b0eec5d%2Finner-frame-minified.html%3Fjsh%3Dm%253B%252F_%252Fscs%252Fapps-static%252F_%252Fjs%252Fk%253Doz.gapi.en.myOGgYJo9ys.O%252Fam%253DwQE%252Fd%253D1%252Fct%253Dzgms%252Frs%253DAGLTcCMR2Cg_3Iqxcgmos-E9G6cjWQG_Kw%252Fm%253D__features__


Men and women have different mobility patterns



#mobility
#gps-data
#sex-differences

























# Alessandretti, Lehmann, & Baronchelli, 2018 "Understanding the interplay..."




Explorative spatial behavior correlates with explorative social behavior. People who go to new restaurants each week also tend to meet new people each week. 




#exploration-exploitation
#undergrad-reading
#mobility








































# Alessandretti et al., 2018 "Evidence for a conserved quantity"




Recent literature says that individuals constantly exploit a small set of repeatedly visited locations. Other literature says that the number of visisted locations grows steadily over time. How do we reconsile these findings?




Individuals maintain a set of ~25 locations, but it updates over time. When you put a new location in your set, you discard an old one. 




Also, the size of one's preferred locations set correlates with the number of her social interactions.




#mobility
#exploration-exploitation
#undergrad-reading









































# male female differences in disease prevalence

images/male-female-disease.jpeg

Auto-immune and inflammatory diseases and anxiety disorders more common in females.
Cancers and autism more common in males. 

#sex-differences
#male-female
#disease











# Eichstaedt et al., 2018 “Facebook language predicts depression…”

Sad language used on Facebook is an early indicator of depression. People who were diagnosed with depression at time T were posting sad content on Facebook at time T - 2.


#undergrad-reading
#facebook
#text-analysis














# Frank, 2018 “Mesaurement invariance explains the universal law of generalization…”

A “sufficient cause” explanation.
- prior explantion used X, Y, and Z.
- B is sufficient to explain it…




Generalization theory: if an agent is trained to associate a stimulus with a behavior, then a similar stimulus will elicit the behavior. The probability of eliciting the behavior decays exponentially as the similarity of the stimulus goes from very similar to not similar at all. Things that are sort of similar do elicit the behavior, but the probability drops off dramatically. Things that are sort of similar - 1 don't elicit the behavior. Things that are sort of similar - 2 don't elicit the behavior. See  Shepard "toward a universal law of generalization"; and Ghirlanda 2003 "a century of generalization"




The exponential function

https://www.khanacademy.org/math/algebra/x2f8bb11595b61c86:exponential-growth-decay/x2f8bb11595b61c86:exponential-decay/v/exponential-decay-intro


#stimulus-response
#sufficient-explanation














# Sznycer et al., 2018 “Cross-cultural invariances in the architecture…”

Shame is a universal emotion.


#shame
#emotions










# Babino et al., 2018 “Maintaining trust when agents…”

Agent-based modeling using a prisoner’s dilemma set up




Don't read. Not a good model description.




#agent-based-modeling
#cooperation














# Bohm et al., 2018 “Costs, needs, and integration efforts…”

Citizens of a host country may support or oppose refugges. What causes those attitudes? Participants are more likely to help “refugees” in an economics game if it isn’t costly to the host, if the host is prosocial, and if the refugee is particularly needy.


Refugee things to consider (from Sam Harris podcast)
- most refugees are in poor not rich countries
- only 3% of refugees go home
- most refugees stay somewhere for multiple generations

Method
- hard to pick apart. You earn money. You then get to decide how to redistribute some of it…some of which could go to refugees if you’d like


#cooperation
#refugees













# Bochicchio & Winsler, 2020 “The Psychology of Olfaction…”

Exactly what it sounds like


#olfaction














# Dubey & Griffiths, 2020 “Reconciling novelty…”

A turing theory on curiosity…but it has good prior literature on curiousity. People are curious among novel tasks or stimuli, when tasks are at moderate difficulty, and when they have moderate confidence.


#curiosity
#motivation
#psych-of-performance


















# Anderson et al., 2019 “Learning rapid and precise skills…”

Good intro to the basic concepts in learning — Fitts model: cognitive phase (develop declarative encoding of skill; error prone performance), associative phase (reduce errors), autonomous phase (automaticity).


#psych-of-performance
#learning





































# Mancini 2019 “When acute adversity improves psychological …”

A multi level theory article. Box and arrow theory.
- when you experience stress, why do some grow whereas others suffer?
- social and psychological moderators



#box-and-arrow
#multi-level-theory
#psych-of-performance
#adversity
















# humor grouped ideas

everyday convo
- misdirection
- tags

structures
- your honor
- netflix show
- kirk correlation
- you look like
- volume / (only worth 500 if...200 lbs, 190 of it...)

#grouped-ideas
#humor





















# Chaudhry & Loewenstein, 2019 “Thanking, apologizing, bragging, and blaming…”


If you brag or blame, you are perceived as competent but at the cost of warmth. If you thank or apologize, you are perceived as warm but at the cost of competence. People are most likely to converge to the equilibrium of thanking and apologizing.

Communicating with another person is an image battle. You are trying to determine what to say to maintain a positive “image” as if a third party is watching you…even if there is not third party watching. Warmth and competence are fundamental dimensions, so they use those dimensions in this study.



#attitudes



























# Walton & Wilson, 2018 “Wise interventions…”

What they propose is basically the same thing as CBT.

These studies underscore (a) that how people make sense of themselves and social situations plays a critical role in the unfolding of their behavior; (b) that key meanings can be altered in precise ways, often with brief exercises; and (c) that doing so can lead to lasting personal and social change


#minsets


























# Kruglanski et al., 2018 “A structural model of intrinsic …”

An activity is intrinsically motivated when it is seen as its own end, and is extrinsically motivated when it is seen as serving a separate, ulterior end. As those ends fuse, the activity becomes intrinsically motivated.

Similarity/repeated association/temporal immediacy =>
fusion =>
means instrumentality / interest
=>
activity engagement


#intrinsic-motivation
#motivation


























# Self regulation research




Self-regulation, the study of psychological and behavioral processes that move people toward desired end-states and away from undesired end-states, encompasses a broad range of phenomena, including those relevant to goal setting, pursuit, and monitoring
(Carver & Scheier, 1998; Lewin, 1935). Research on selfregulation has identified a diverse set of factors that promote successful goal pursuit. For example, people are especially likely to succeed when they (a) set clear goals or plans for action (Carver
& Scheier, 1998; Gollwitzer, 1999; Gollwitzer, Fujita, & Oettingen, 2004); (b) pursue a goal with means that fit their preferred self-regulatory orientation (Higgins, 2000); (c) feel confident in their ability to achieve the goal (Bandura, 1977); (d) believe that
ability is malleable rather than fixed (Dweck & Leggett, 1988); (e) pursue a goal in the same psychological state present at the time they set the goal (Loewenstein, 1996); (f) distract themselves from temptations (Mischel, Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989); (g) automatically, upon encountering a temptation, bring to mind the goal that would be violated by succumbing to that temptation (Fishbach, Friedman, & Kruglanski, 2003); (h) encounter environmental cues that point toward the goal (Bargh et al., 2001; Chartrand & Bargh, 1996); (i) set specific and challenging goals (Locke & Latham, 1990); and (j) possess adequate resources (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice, 1998; Bull, Espy, & Wiebe, 2008).



#self-regulation
#motivation




# Fitzsimons et al., 2015 “Transactive goal dynamics”

We need to think of self-regulation from a “multiple people” perspective, from a social and interdependent perspective. Relationship partners are not independent goal pursuers who occasionally influence each other, but subparts of one self-regulating system.


Theory tenants
- relationship partners’ goals are so strongly related that they are one system
- the extent to which the sysem is interdependent (its density) is caused by:
++ opportunities for partner relationships
++ partners’ motivation for interdependence
- when partners are interdependent, then their chance of realizing positive outcomes depends on how well they coordinate


keywords
- psych of performance
- goals
- self regulation
- such a general theory that it is useless
- good example of great intro but such a broad, abstract theory that it’s hard to know what to do with. This is a heuristic framework


#psych-of-performance
#goals
#self-regulation
#bad-writing













#
# anchoring as DV

Anchoring is a DV accepted by JAP.
- binyamin: judgement bias is bad. Anchoring is the worst judgment bias. 

What processes lead to anchoring?

Selective Accessibility Model (SAM: Mussweiler & Strack, 1999; Strack & Mussweiler, 1997)
THIS MODEL IS SUPER CONNECTED TO THE 2 QUESTION PARADIGM 
They created it for situations in which the anchor is plausible.
Tversky's original experiments showed that completely irrelevant anchors still had an effect.
Q1. How many miles is the missisipi? Longer or shorter than 2000?
Q2 later. How many miles is the missisippi? Provide an exact estimate. 

There is a process whereby individuals' attention becomes narrowed and focused on the anchor, and subsequently this anchor has a disproportionate effect on the judgment of the target. 

Assuming evaluators know nothing about Q1, they assume the correct answer is somewhere close to the anchor. This creates a new mental model for them.

Then, when asked q2, their attention is narrowly constrained to the original anchor. 

Binyamin description:
High arousal, negative states narrow perspectives and cause people only to focus on central pieces of information.
- same with low perspective taking
- same with high construal

Event-induced negative arousal (they examine rudeness only) exacerbates the narrowing process, making anchoring more likely. 


So, anything that exacerbates narrow thinking on the central features of something should be positively related to anchoring. 


depletion
high construal (physical distance, time distance)
negative affect high arousal due to negative event (supervisor BLM)


#anchor-as-dv
#mimic-study
#rudeness
#jap
#use-items
#pg-blm


















# Valcea, Hamdani, & Bradley, 2019 “Weakest link goal orientations and team expertise”

Greater expertise among team members improves team performance. This relationship, though, does not hold when teams have a weak link: someone with a low learning goal orientation (or a high avoid orientation).

Hypotheses and operationalization:
- the association between team expertise and team performance will be moderated by the learning orientation weak link, such that the less learning oriented the weakest link is, the less the team will benefit from the team’s expertise.

### General writing on how to aggregate over members of a team:

Team members with the weakest dispositional motivations can have dis- proportionate effect on team functioning given the nature of task interdepen- dencies in teams. Additive models presume that each member is working on similar tasks, and contextual factors and interactions are such that the amount of member contributions are relatively uniform or the variation thereof is additive in nature (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). In contrast, when working on nonadditive tasks, each team member might be performing a different set of functions and as such might be expected to coordinate and share information (i.e., have higher interdependence). In such cases, simple additive models might not be suitable to analyze team function. Nonadditive tasks are rela- tively more complex tasks, and the quality of a single member’s work can have a disproportionate effect on team output, thereby warranting the use of minimum or maximum team models (Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). Minimum or maximum models are also referred to as relative-contribution models of team composition (Mathieu, Tannenbaum, Donsbach, & Alliger, 2014).

In minimum or maximum models, the situational factors or interactional processes are such that the highest or lowest value for a member determines the standing of the entire group. For instance, consider leadership skills of an executive team facing a crisis. In this case, it is not the average level of lead- ership in the group that determines the effectiveness of crisis management, but the maximum level of leadership. Even if most members do not show excellence in leadership, as long as there is one strong leader, the group as a whole can effectively navigate the crisis. Thus, in this case, the maximum level of leadership determines the collective outcome. Now consider the example of a pediatric cardiac intensive care unit, where there are strict rules for ensuring good sanitation practices to avoid fatal infections in pediatric patients. In this environment, having one noncompliant team member is suf- ficient to negatively affect the patient outcomes of the unit, even when on average other members follow the rules. One weak link is sufficient to cause fatal infections in the patients.

In line with relative contribution models, we focus on the goal orientation weakest link, rather than on the variance or average goal orientation of team members. Overall, we utilize a combination of the additive and the relative contribution models of team composition to test our hypotheses. Specifically, we model team-member expertise as a team resource that members add to the team, using the additive model. With respect to goal orientations, we focus on the effects of the weakest member relative to the rest of the team.

[An example of student groups and aggregating performance]

The focus of the project was to learn and explain how to successfully manage change in organizations. Each team was expected to (a) research a real-world example of an organization that altered its own structure or made significant changes within its market or industry, (b) describe the organization before and after the changes, and (c) analyze how successful the implementation of change was using various business models and outcomes. The project was a rigorous group task demanding learning, critical thinking, idea generation, and communication. Effective project delivery required division of responsi- bilities as well as collaboration and integration of efforts to formulate a suc- cessful report. Thus, the nature of the task demanded considerable interdependence among group members. Therefore, it is less likely that sim- ple pooling of each member’s work (additive tasks) or having the most com- petent person on the team (disjunctive task) could result in successful project delivery. In contrast, each member was expected to perform at a minimally acceptable level for the team to deliver an effective report (conjunctive task).

### writing about weakest links:

Teams are often assigned tasks that are complex and require individuals to work together to be successful. Because complex tasks require higher task interdependence among team members (Saavedra, Earley, & Dyne, 1993), they are more conjunctive in nature (Harrison & Humphrey, 2010). Thus, the quality of work can be disproportionality influenced by the weakest team- mate, or weakest link, in the team (Barrick, Stewart, Neubert, & Mount, 1998; Harrison & Humphrey, 2010). Yet, little research has explored weak links in terms of goal orientations. We chose to focus on the single weakest team member on goal orientations given that the weakest link is more damag- ing for team processes than the strongest link is helpful (Felps et al., 2006; Raver, Ehrhart, & Chadwick, 2012), according to the principle of bad is stronger than good (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, & Vohs, 2001).

Previous team research on goal orientations has mostly focused on average- level (e.g., LePine, 2005), and occasionally on variance in team members’ goal orientations (e.g., Pieterse, van Knippenberg, & van Ginkel, 2011). Models based on the average imply that it is the collective pool of a characteristic that matters and not how that characteristic is distributed among the team members (Barrick et al., 1998). In average models, weak and strong members are expected to balance out each other, and the bad is stronger than good principle is ignored. Models based on variance focus on the homogeneity of a characteristic and are relevant in contexts where fit, or lack thereof, among team members is central for team effectiveness (Barrick et al., 1998). Finally, team models based on the highest or the lowest member-trait are relevant in contexts where one person’s trait can have a disproportionate influence on the team. For example, in a sequential task—where one group member must act in a prescribed order, before another can act—the least competent person can become a bottleneck. Similarly, in an interdependent task—where members simultaneously interact to jointly diagnose, problem-solve, and collaborate—an uncooperative member can jeop- ardize the project. Models based on a minimum or maximum trait levels are suitable for exploring the bad is stronger than the good principle.

Extant research shows that the presence of a weak link, or a bad apple, in teams can negatively influence team outcomes. For example, research has identified traits such as disagreeableness, low conscientiousness (Bell, 2007), Machiavellianism, cognitive moral development, locus of control (Kish- Gephart, Harrison, & Treviño, 2010), and a lack of self-control (Marcus & Schuler, 2004) as disposition-based identifiers of problem employees at work. The behaviors of social loafing (Barrick et al., 1998; Bolin & Neuman, 2006; Kidwell & Bennett, 1993), withholding cooperation (Chatman & Barsade, 1995; Wu, Sun, Cai, & Jin, 2014), and spreading negative emotions (Barrick et al., 1998; Cole, Walter, & Bruch, 2008; Felps et al., 2006) have also been linked with problematic employees. The presence of such employ- ees in teams is associated with destructive conflict (Barrick et al., 1998), lower cohesion (Barrick et al., 1998; Van Vianen & De Dreu, 2001), lower cooperation, poorer communication (Barrick et al., 1998; Raver et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2014), and weaker team performance (Halfhill, Nielsen, Sundstrom, & Weilbaecher, 2005; Neuman & Wright, 1999; Van Vianen & De Dreu, 2001). We seek to extend the work on weak links by focusing on individual team members with very low learning orientation or very high avoid orienta- tion. We organize our arguments using primarily an information processing paradigm (Hinsz, Tindale, & Vollrath, 1997) for low learning orientation weak links, and a limited resource self-regulation paradigm (Vohs et al., 2008) for high avoid orientation weak links. Next, we highlight how these difficult teammates may hinder the effective use of expertise in teams.

People with low learning goal orientation may act as a bottleneck:

Based on the two dimensions of differentiation and integration, individu- als can be placed on a continuum ranging from simple to complex thinking. As illustrated in our review of the goal orientation literature, individuals with low learning orientation appear to share inclinations with individuals with low integrative complexity (i.e., simpler thinking). More specifically, both are less likely to value or encourage diverse opinions (Park & DeShon, 2010; Tetlock et al., 1993), and both are less inclined to be creative and innovative (Gong et al., 2013; Tadmor, Galinsky, & Maddux, 2012). Finally, individuals with low integrative complexity prefer less complex information environ- ments, adopt less complex information searching strategies, and communi- cate and innovate less than individuals with high integrative complexity (Driver & Streufert, 1969). Similarly individuals low on learning orientation prefer less challenging situations (Dweck & Leggett, 1988; Elliott & Dweck, 1988), seek less feedback (Payne et al., 2007), and exchange less information (Gong et al., 2013).

Based on the above arguments, it appears that individuals with low LGO have lower integrative complexity. Driver and Streufert (1969) argued that individuals with high integrative complexity can effectively process more complex information inputs into more complex decision outputs. Accordingly, individuals low on learning orientation may bottleneck the processing of information in teams by either providing less complex informational inputs to team members, or by producing less complex outputs from information received from team members. These members might be less willing to expend effort to process complex information and, consequently, may deter teams from integrating complex information into decisions.

People with a high avoid orientation may act as a comradre dampener:

Individuals high on avoid orientation are likely to reduce team performance for at least three reasons: (a) they are more likely to avoid information exchange; (b) when they do exchange informa- tion with others, they are more likely to focus on threats and negative contin- gencies, instead of opportunities; and (c) they can act as a confidence dampener in the team.


Method

Student teams. Evaluated over a semester.
- team performance (outcome) = End of course project grade; team level
- team expertise (predictor) = ACT scores; team level
- goal orientation (predictor) = answer individual q’s. Take max for each team and use it

team goal orientation (as based on weakest link) + team expertise = team performance







#aggregating-function
#weakest-link
#collective-performance
#team-performance





















# Stroebe et al., 2013 “Why most dieters fail but some”

A theory about choosing to eat vs choosing to refrain.
- cues => activated goal => deactivates other goals => behavior

#self-regulation
#motivation
#weight-loss





















# Stephens et al., 2012 “Social Class …”

Great overview of the debate concerning different reasons for health and education disparities.
- individual motivation model
- structural model

These authors say that we actually need to see them as mutually reinforcing causes

keywords
- social class
- inequality
- inequity
- motivation vs structural


#social-class
#inequality
#motivation
#economics
















# Swann et al., 2012 “When group membership gets personal…”

An article about extreme group identity. What are the causes and outcomes of having na identity that is completely fused with the group?


#teams















# quote, philosophy

Just because you can do something doesn't mean you should. Sometimes it takes more courage to walk away than to make a bad situation worse.


#quote
#philosophy




























# Hirsh et al., 2012 “Psychological entropy: a framework…”

When lower level goals are disrupted, less of your experienced world is disrupted. You aren’t as anxious in this case.

When major, higher level goals are disrupted, more of your situations and possible behaviors are disrupted, which results in high anxiety.

Disrupting a major goal = high anxiety
Disrupting a minor goal = low anxiety

Great description of human behavior in general. “ability to successfully perform work and obtain rewards through goal-directed perception and action. Much of our lives is spent trying to reduce and manage the uncertainty that we encounter. We perform this task by
acquiring valuable metabolic and cognitive resources from the environment, while utilizing cultural frameworks that help us to establish a sense of purpose and value.”


keywords
- self regulation
- psych of performance
- motivation
- anxiety


#goals
#self-regulation
#motivation
#psych-of-performance




























# Borgatti 2005 "centrality and flow"




https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/computer-science/closeness-centrality

In a flow context, we ordinarily interpret closeness an an index of the expected time until arrival of something flowing through the network. Nodes with low raw closeness scores have short distances from others, and so will tend to receive flows sooner, assuming that what flows originates from all other nodes with equal probability, and also assuming that whatever is flowing manages to travel along shortest paths. In the case of information flows, we normally think of nodes with low closeness scores as being well-positioned to obtain novel information early, when it has the most value. Thus, organizations with low closeness in an R&D technology-sharing network are able to develop products sooner than others. In contrast, individuals with low closeness scores in a sexual network are positioned to catch infections early, possibly before treatments are available in the case of new diseases.

If traffic did not travel along shortest paths, we would not want to interpret closeness as an index of expected time until arrival. Thus, the canonical interpretation of closeness is accurate for two kinds of processes: those in which things flow along shortest paths, such as the package delivery process, and those in which things flow by parallel duplication. In the latter case, all possible paths are followed simultaneously, including the shortest path, and so
the net effect is the same. It would be inappropriate to see closeness centrality as an index of reception speed for other flow processes. For example, we might be tempted to use closeness to indicate who is likely to receive news early in a gossip process. However, since gossip does not necessarily follow shortest paths, the rank ordering of who receives information earliest on average will not correspond to the ordering provided by the closeness centrality measure, as can easily be confirmed by simulation. (Tests of this kind are presented in the next section.)



#networks













Eliminating harmful language backfires at colleges.
Instead, give people the benefit of the doubt, and consider the intent of people's words. 

If people are told that micro-aggressions are harmful, then they interpret ambiguous statements as harmful. 

The point of an educational institution is to expose students to ideas or positions that they might not have otherwise entertained or heard. 

https://twitter.com/Komi_Frey/status/1608645730364952581?cxt=HHwWisDQ_Zmxh9MsAAAA


#micro-aggressions
#anti-woke
#great-paper
































# Heckhausen et al., 2010 “A motivational theory of life-span…”




Table of goal-related findings. See pages 44ish-46ish. The table states the proposition and the supporting evidence. So, state the proposition in class and go over the study.

The theory basically states that having control over your environment is healthy. When you chose a goal, you should chose one [notice that it’s an optimizing theory] that offers you control; that considers other goals; that should allow you to maintain a diversity of goal pursuits.

1.. People want to realize control over their environment (primary control)

2.. Having primary control in your life is healthy

3.. People exepct to lose primary control capacity as they age

4.. Older adults use more secondary control striving mechanisms — such as goal disengagement, downward goal adjustment, reinterpreting failures and events to protect the self

6.. People engage with goals for which opportunities for attainment are favorable

7.. People disengage with goals for which opportunities for attainment are unfavorable

8/9.. Goal choice requires goal activation/inhibition

12.. When people find goal pursuits futile or costly, then disengage

14. Goal disengagement is easier when alternatives exist







keywords
- psych of performance
- self regulation
- motivation
- well being
- locus of control



#goals
#self-regulation
#motivation
#locus-of-control
















































# Wood & Neal, 2007 “A new look at habits…”

Good review of the habit literature.

#motivation
#habits
#self-regulation















# Brewer & Chen, 2007 “Where (who) are collectives in collectivism…”

The collectivism-individualism distinction is the most prevalent in cross cultural research. But measures of collectivism don’t measure collectives. Instead, they asses individual beliefs. They offer a framework.

keywords
- cross cultural
- content validity
- collectivism




#collectivism
#measurement







# things that require sacrifice will bring more fulfillment at the end of life

As you age, bitter sweet chocolate becomes tastier than sweet chocolate. Things that come with sacrifice, pain, and tragedy, they come to be valued more steeply. 


#staring-ceiling
#aging
#philosophy




















# all walk up flirt openers


# any opener

Hi there. You caught my attention. Just wanted to chat for a second, maybe get your number. What's your name?
Hi there. I like your outfit. Just wanted to chat for a second, maybe get your number. What's your name?
Hi. I like your outfit [describe]. White shoes with a green dress. Good combo. Just wanted to chat for a second, maybe get your number. What's your name?

Miss.
Hello.


# push pull on outfit

Hi. Your outfit caught my attention. Looks like an interesting combination of [push pull]
professional and party

trouble maker
playful
rebel
devil
edgy

stylish
laid back
polished


# push pull on features

You look like an interesting combination of...
interesting how your X says ... but your Y says...
posture
outfit
smile
hair
shoes
eyes

massive, cold, lifeless eyes (wonder what it's like to see the world through...)
trouble maker
playful
rebel
devil
edgy
deviant
defiant
provocative
daring
bad
mean
barely above average

innocent
professional
charming
stunning
cute
bold
bubbly

# open loop

Hi. I like your outfit. Wanted to see if you are as interesting as your outfit would suggest. 


#flirt
#flirt-opener
#social-animal



































# Reeck, Wall, & Johnson, 2017 “Search predicts and changes…”

Intertemporal choice impacts many important outcomes, such as decisions about health, education, wealth, and the environment. However, the psychological processes underlying decisions involving outcomes at different points in time remain unclear, limiting opportunities to intervene and improve people’s patience. This research examines information-search strategies used during intertemporal choice and their impact on decisions. In experiment 1, we demonstrate that search strategies vary substantially across individuals. We subsequently identify two distinct search strategies across individuals. Comparative searchers, who compare features across options, discount future options less and are more susceptible to acceleration versus delay framing than integrative searchers, who integrate the features of an option.

Comparative = consider the price of a skewdriver and then compare prices (a single attribute) across all screwdrivers at store

Integrative = consider the price, color, weight, features, and functionality of a single screwdriver

Keywords
- discounting

#discounting
#motivation












# Dai & Busemeyer 2014 “A probabilitistic, dynamic …”

EXCELLENT intro to intertemporal choice models. Motivate need for probabilitistic models. Motivate need for dynamic models.

keywords
- intertemporal choice
- mathematical modeling
- discounting

#discounting
#intertemporal-choice
#decision-making











# Morelli, Ong, Makati, Jackson, & Zaki, 2017 “Empathy and well-being correlate with …”

Personality trait X predicts centrality among a network with Y ties but personality trait A predicts centrality among a network with B ties. Give college dorm-livers psychological questions. Also ask them to nominate dorm members regarding interpersonal relationships. They built a trust network and a “fun and excitement” network.

People high on well-being were central to networks characterized by fun, whereas people high in empathy were central to networks characterized by trust.

A network map of one dorm shows that students with more nominations (i.e., larger nodes) for the question “Who usually makes you feel positive (e.g., happy, enthusiastic)?” also tend to rank higher on trait positive emotion. (Bottom) A network map of the same dorm shows that students with more nominations for the question “Who do you turn to when something bad happens?” also tend to rank higher on trait empathy.


keywords
- social networks
- mimic study
- psych of performance


#networks
#example-to-mimic











# woke example writing in academic research and funding



How is she going to get funding if she doesn't but Nano, Cancer, or Artificial Intelligence in her grant proposal? Most importantly where is her diversity, equity and inclusion statement. You can't do science without addressing how your science is going to deal with sciences problematic history - its imperialist past and its validation of systems of whiteness/oppression.

#sjw
#woke
#academese





























# Kubanek 2017 “Optimal decision making …”




Discussion of utility vs matching models of decision-making.

Utility: maximize income or utility
Matching: distribute behavior in proportion to relative rewards

Any individual will distribute his or her behaviour between the alternatives (i.e. Behaviour A and Behaviour B) in the same ratio that reinforcement i.e. (Reinforcement A and Reinforcement B) has been obtained for those alternatives.

Over a time period, you will have hit “A” a certain number of times and “B” a certain number of times. The proportion will match the proportion of rewards.

This is similar to probability matching. Indeed, it is probability matching. Humans don’t optimize or exploit a single lever, we probability match.




Keywords
- decision making
- probaility matching
- matching law


#probability-matching
#decision-making












# Kakkar & Sivanathan, 2017 “When the appeal of a dominant …”

In times of uncertainty, people prefer dominate, authoritarian leaders. Cool “uncertainty” discussion.

keywords
- attitudes
- well being
- uncertainty
- dominance, prestige, power


#uncertainty
#leadership
#dominance































# Jun, Meng, Johar, 2017 “Perceived social presence …”

Eight experiments furnish convergent evidence that perceiving the presence of others reduces people’s willingness to fact-check claims.

So, on social media, you think other people are around — you perceive social presence — and so you are less likely to fact check.

keywords
- fake news
- social media
- science intake
- news
- literature reviews


#fake-news












































# Bernhardsson 2020 “Never attribute to stupidity that which is adequately explained …”

https://erikbern.com/2020/03/10/never-attribute-to-stupidity-that-which-is-adequately-explained-by-opportunity-cost.html#:~:text=Never%20attribute%20to%20stupidity%20that%20which%20is%20adequately%20explained%20by%20opportunity%20cost,-2020%2D03%2D10&text=Hanlon's%20razor%20is%20a%20classic,be%20adequately%20explained%20by%20stupidity.


Why haven’t things happened yet? Why aren’t things a certain way?
- because people haven’t had time to get around to it
- something else was more important

Prioritization is the most value creating activity in any company. Generating ideas and executing things is of course also important! But what I've seen to set apart great teams from good is a brutal focus on prioritization. This means generating an absurd amount of ideas and throwing 99% of them out of the window, to focus on the 1% that have the highest impact.

Ideas will be generated much faster than there's bandwidth to execute on them, so you're doing something right if your backlog is growing indefinitely. A negative person on a mediocre team will complain that there's never time to work on their favorite pet project X. I've often heard things like “our backlog of features keeps growing so fast, how are we ever going to have time to invest in paying down tech debt?".

To me this reflects a misunderstanding of how product development should work. Backlogs should be growing indefinitely. What a good team will do is to accept that, and establish a good relationship between product and tech, and make sure you constantly keep reprioritizing. Maybe today it's shipping a bunch of features the business needs. Maybe tomorrow it's paying down some tech debt. If you have a shared framework for how to think about value and prioritization, it usually works out.


#goals
#priorities
#queue
#motivation
#teams
#strategy
























# Cooney, Gilbert, & Wilson, 2016 “When fairness matters less than we expect …”

The person allocating resources (money, status, grants, etc.) to others overestimates how much the receiver actually cares about fairness.

keywords
- overestimate
- overconfidence
- fairness
- justice, equity


#fairness
#justice
#leadership



















# De Dreu et al., 2016 “In-group defense, out-group aggression…”

Describe the tension between contributing to (a) initiatives to aggress against other out-groups vs (b) initiatives to strengthen in-group’s defenses. Bad paper. Cool cite section.

From group-hunting by lions, wolves, or killer whales (24, 25), to groups of chimpanzees raiding their neighbors (11), to hostile takeovers in the marketplace (26), and to territorial conflicts within and between nation states (27), intergroup conflict is often a clash between the antagonist’s out-group aggression and the opponent’s in-group defense (23, 28). Second, in-group defense and out-group aggression appear to have distinct neurobiological origins (5, 29⇓–31), and may thus recruit different within-group dynamics (4, 28). Whereas self-defense is impulsive and relies on brain structures involved in threat signaling and emotion regulation, offensive aggression is more instrumental and conditioned by executive control (29⇓–31). Third, the motivation to avoid loss is stronger than the search for gain (32, 33), suggesting that individuals more readily contribute to defensive, rather than offensive, aggression. Finally, self-sacrifice in combat is publicly rewarded more (e.g., with a Medal of Honor) when it served in-group defense rather than out-group aggression (34). Accordingly, in-group defense may emerge more spontaneously, and individuals may be more intrinsically motivated to contribute to in-group defense than to out-group aggression.

Notion of dispersion within a group: are most people contributing to defense or to out-group aggression.

If in-group defense is indeed more intrinsically motivating and spontaneous, groups preparing for in-group defense should face fewer noncontributors than groups preparing for out-group aggression. Aggressor groups should thus have higher within-group dispersion in contributions and may have greater difficulty organizing adequate out-group aggression. This collective action problem in aggressor groups may emerge because of motivation failure (individuals are less willing to contribute to out-group aggression than to in-group defense), or it may be the result of poor coordination (it is more difficult to coordinate and align individual contributions to effectively aggress a rivaling group than it is to raise a proper in-group defense).


keywords
- dispersion
- cooperation
- conflict


#cooperation
#conflict










# Suchak et al., 2016 “How chimpanzees cooperate in …”

Great intro on cooperation among humans.

keywords
- cooperation reference
- evolution of cooperation
- psych of performance
- nowak compare



#cooperation
#evolution-of-cooperation





















# multi level modeling equations

see images/mlm equations





















# Smith & Hofmann, 2016 “Power in everyday life … ”


ESM measures to examine correlates of power. Subjective feelings of power resulted more from within-participant situational fluctuation, such as the social roles participants held at different times, than from stable differences between people.


keywords
- power
- esm
- within person
- dynamics
- situation vs person
- fluctuating states rather than traits



#situation-vs-person
#trait-state
#power

























# Akinola et al., 2016 “Collective hormonal profiles predict group performance”

Groups with a collective hormonal profile characterized by high testosterone and low cortisol exhibit the highest performance.

keywords
- psych of performance
- collective performance
- hormones

#collective-performance
#hormones




















# Steptoe & Wardle, 2017 “Life skills, wealth, health, and wellbeing …”

Great discussion of life skills and correlates with well-being/economic outcomes. Something about accumulating these skills over time.

keywords
- well-being
- careers
- life well-being
- psych of performance
- life skills
- traits



#well-being
#careers
#motivation
#lifespan
#skills












# ideas don't spread because they are true, but because they are easy to understand and easy to spread


Meme theory: a successful ideology (the only kind we hear about) is not configured to be true; it is configured only to be easily transmitted and easily believed.

Language as an adaptive system: Language thus behaves a bit like an organism adapting to an environmental niche. We are that niche. languages adapt to become easier to learn by the kinds of agents that are there to learn them.


#grouped-ideas






















# Brand et al., 2020 “Analogy as the core cumulative cultural …”

Analogies are a mechanism for human understanding. They played a huge role in our cultural evolution. They are a mechanism that aids cumulation.

Analogies allow individuals to effectively communicate while avoiding the memory requirements of new jargon, enabling the linking of steps in an ordered sequence, and anchoring the new information onto an already learnt concept for easier encoding and future retrieval.

THE EFFECT OF ACCUMULATION:

The novel concepts, once learned, become fodder for future analogies. This accumulation of analogies is part of what facilitates cumulative culture. 100 years ago, it would be near impossible to explain to someone what a digital computer is and how it works; Alan Turing’s original papers are typically too dense to be easily accessible or understood. Now, after years of analogy to ease our familiarity (“desktops”, “folders”, “documents”), we have useful concepts about how computers work, and so we have a new analogy for the brain, an analogy that wouldn’t have been possible 100 years ago and one that provides new ways to conceptualise parts of the brain and how it works.


#analogy
#cultural-psych
#anthropology












# tyler cowen thoughts







tyler cowen
- you want to sample how they process information, not how they prepare for a job interview
- get people to speak about something they are excited about
- do they think carefully?
- how can you tell if someone will be durable or persistent?

https://www.aei.org/podcast/tyler-cowen-on-talent-and-hiring-in-the-twenty-first-century/
research study
tyler cowen and brent orrell
get people talking in ways to see how they process information
all of their recommendations are one-sided.
AS AN INTERVIEWER, I CAN ASK THIS NEWSPAPER QUESTION TO GET THE CANDIDATE TO TALK ABOUT SOMETHING HE/SHE WAS UNPREPARED FOR AND PERHAPS EXCITED ABOUT. 
But take the perspective of a job-seeker. If I sit down in an interview with "Cowen's philosophy" in mind, especially at places that are risk-averse like academia, then I'm screwed. 







Honestly, the first thing I would do if I were a young person is learn to converse normally.  I think growing up with access to digital devices has SEVERELY stunted peoples' ability to communicate in ways that my generation took for granted.  There's a TON of interpersonal nuance that kids these days are just NOT picking up on.  Body language, vocal inflection, facial expression - when I'm talking with teenagers and twenty-somethings, I honestly feel like I'm dealing with people on the autistic spectrum.  And it's not because they're actually autistic.  It's just that communication digitally has robbed them of something critically and fundamentally human.  And their verbal ability is just not there.  Too many times in recent years have I encountered kids that I thought were speaking a foreign language, only to realize that English is the only language they know.  And this isn't a regional dialect issue.  Some of them honestly have trouble articulating words in anything resembling a coherent fashion.

It breaks my heart to speak to a younger person in a normal everyday context, only to watch them panic, break eye contact, and mumble their way through the interaction as though they're terrified.  And you can see it coming:  that deer-in-the-headlights look, followed by the most awkward, halting interaction you can imagine.

If I were a young person today, I would learn to learn to walk up to another person (in an appropriate setting, of course), look them in the eye, shake their hand, introduce myself by name, and ask them for their name in return.  I would FORCE myself to do this over and over until it became easy.  I guarantee something this simple would make a world of difference for some of these kids.




richard henia gives grants
- woke practices on org behavior
- safetyism; scientism
- signal political affiliation in everything
- no "red tape everywhere" thing, but maybe I could work it in
https://www.cspicenter.com/about

john carter
https://barsoom.substack.com/p/the-dieing-prestige-of-the-academy








#tyler-cowen
#marginal-revolution











# more on my issue with the iceburg analogy



Christopher has not said anything in this meeting.

ice lesson
what I am seeing may not be the full story. I could be fooled. 
Recommendation: go deeper.
Assumption: you can go deeper.
christopher: why haven't you said anything?

multiple ice lesson
what I am seeing could be consistent with many underlying causes
Recommendation: humility.
Assumption: too much happening for you to spend your time going deeper. 
christopher: even by asking the question, why haven't you said anything? I may never be able to distinguish. 


ice lesson: there is more underneath. Try to get to it. 
multi ice lesson: what I am seeing could be consistent with many underneath things. 

The iceburg leads to pursuit
The multiple iceburg leads to humility. 

#christopher-thinking
#iceburg












# Sun et al. 2020 “Eavesdropping on missing data: What are University students doing …”

Give ESM surveys to undergrads and identify what they are doing when this miss a survey. What predicts missing a report?

Method
- students complete ESM study
- wear audio device that records everything the entire week
++ offers alternative source of what participants were doing when they missed a survey

Take away
- little evidence that missing an ESM report was correlated with constructs typically of interest to ESM researchers
- missing ESM reports are not predictable by sociability or emotion

A null model that had only information on sample-wide levels and between-person differences in missingness was able to correctly classify 82.7% of the reports as being missing or completed. In other words, knowing the overall rate of missingness and which participants generally tend to miss more or fewer reports provided quite a strong basis for predicting whether or not a given report was missing or completed.

Participants were more likely to miss reports during the evening.

Missingness increased over the course of the study.


#missingness
#data-analysis
#missing-data






































# Mousa 2020 “Building social cohesion between “

Increase cohesion between conflicting groups by giving them a shared activity…but the greater cooperation doesn’t transfer. There is a transfer problem of cooperation. You can increase it for activity A but it doesn’t generalize to activities B, C, and D.

Can intergroup contact build social cohesion after war? I randomly assigned Iraqi Christians displaced by the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) to an all-Christian soccer team or to a team mixed with Muslims. The intervention improved behaviors toward Muslim peers: Christians with Muslim teammates were more likely to vote for a Muslim (not on their team) to receive a sportsmanship award, register for a mixed team next season, and train with Muslims 6 months after the intervention. The intervention did not substantially affect behaviors in other social contexts.




keywords
- cooperation
- cohesion
- transfer


#cooperation
#cohesion






























# teaching people analytics skills and abilities

what skills do HR people need?
- data collection and management
- statistical analysis
- machine learning
- data visualization
- business acumen

#teaching-people-analytics
#hr-skills
#teaching
#business-analytics




























# Lang & Kell 2020 “General mental ability and specific abilities … “

General mental ability (cognitive ability) predicts career outcomes

keywords
- psych of performance
- cognitive ability
- career success


#intelligence
















# Anja et al., 2020 “Coworker support and its relationship to allostasis …”

Coworker support correlates with growth trend in heart rate.

keywords
- growth trend
- lcm model
- cooperation


#growth-modeling-weird




























# Klein et al., 2020 “when goals are known ..”

Our findings highlight that it is not enough for goals to be made known to facilitate commitment but that they should be made known to someone perceived as having higher status.


keywords
- psych of performance
- self regulation
- motivation

#goals
#motivation
#self-regulation























# Elad et al. 2020 “I do not need feedback ..”

High self efficacy can mean that someone doesn’t seek (necessary) feedback.


keywords
- self regulation
- psych of performance
- motivation

#self-regulation
#feedback
#motivation












# Welsh et al., 2020 “Hot pursuit: the affective …”

High organization-set goals will elicit anxiety due to an appraisal characterized by uncertainty and threat, whereas high self-set goals will elicit enthusiasm due to an appraisal characterized by positive expectations and benefit.


keywords
- psych of performance
- self regulation
- motivation

- undergrad research reading


#goals
#self-regulation
#undergrad-reading













# pareto principle

https://www.thelangelfirm.com/debt-collection-defense-blog/2018/august/100-examples-of-the-80-20-rule/#:~:text=20%25%20of%20people%20in%20your%20life%20consume%2080%25%20of%20your,to%2080%25%20of%20your%20happiness.

"100 short examples of Pareto's 80/20 rule"

#pareto-principle
#80/20-rule
#power-laws
#pareto-examples










# Maslow's hierarchy is not a pyramid




Everybody misuses his theory

http://www.johnballardphd.com/blog/the-search-for-maslows-pyramid-why-it-matters





keywords

- motivation

- self regulation

- psych of performance

- maslow




#maslow
#goals
#motivation





























# Brennan, McGrady et al., 2019 "Effects of a resiliency program on burnout ..."




Great undergraduate research methods practice paper. An intervention to reduce stress among medical students.




Look up other Angele McGrady papers for stress in the workplace, mindfulness, etc.




keywords

- psych of performance: stress in workplace

- research methods

- scientific reading





#undergrad-reading
#stress

























# Waltz "Organizational citizenship behaviors..."




Great "ocb in the aggregate" paper. Correlate OCBs with firm-level outcomes.




keywords

- OCB in the aggregate

- org OCB with org performance

- psych of performance

- undergraduate reading

- scientific reading


#ocb-in-aggregate
#ocb
#undergrad-reading



















# Brennan et al. "Effects of a resiliency program on burnout..."

Intervention to decrease burnout.

keywords

- interventions don't last

- dynamics shock

- scientific reading

- undergraduate reading



#burnout
#interventions
#undergrad-reading







































# Livan, 2019 “Don’t follow the leader: how ranking performance…”

Should you randomly select actions to perform well or imitate high-performing others?

Great discussion of “the tyranny of metrics.”

Great discussion of “public performance rankings and its effects on individual performance.” If my performance is made public, do I infact perform better?
- do we not understand the psychology underlying it?
- what is the psychology of how people react to public rankings?

Great discussion of the role of serendipity in performance




keywords
- agent based model
- psych of performance
- serendipity



#agent-based-model
#tyranny-of-metrics
#luck













# Li et al., 2018 “Reciprocity and success in academic careers.”

Evidence that academics reciprocate citations (…but doing so doesn’t gaurantee long-term success).

Yet, our results show that a remarkable proportion of most scientists’ citations come, on average, from their immediate “neighbourhood.” We interpret this as an echo of the academic community’s collective incentive to boost individual metrics of academic reputation.

Results are statsy. As such, they cannot provide insight about the countless reasons that might induce individual authors to reciprocate citations. A proper investigation of potentially malicious practices deliberately aimed at boosting bibliometric indicators is well beyond the scope of the present work, and most likely would entail collecting data by interviewing authors.
- again, let’s look at the psychology behind this

keywords
- cooperation
- psych of performance
- reciprocity


#reciprocity
#cooperation
#academia













# Aarons et al. "The roles of system and organizational leadership in..."

Leadership effects in clinical health settings.

keywords

- psych of performance

- undergraduate reading

- scientific reading

- leadership


#leadership
#climate













# McShane et al. "Blinding us to the obvious?..."

Good example of "examine how lay people evaluate null hypothesis stats testing" that can get published in management science. Simple method.

keywords

- management science easy study run example

- interpret p values


#research-methods
#stats















# The limits of intuition

Brian Eno


I saw for the first time a computer demonstration of John Conway's Life. For those of you who don't know it, it's a simple grid with dots that are acted on according to an equally simple and totally deterministic set of rules. The rules decide which dots will live, die, or be born in the next step. There are no tricks, no creative stuff, just the rules. The whole system is so transparent that there should be no surprises at all, but in fact there are plenty: The complexity and "organic-ness" of the evolution of the dot patterns completely beggars prediction. You change the position of one dot at the start and the whole story turns out wildly differently. You tweak one of the rules in a tiny bit and there's an explosion of growth or instant Armageddon. You just have no (intuitive) way of guessing which it's going to be. 

This example elegantly demonstrates the following to me: (a) "Deterministic" does not mean predictable; and (b) we aren't good at intuiting the interaction of simple rules with initial conditions. 



#edge
#systems-dynamics
#logic-of-failure





# science quote

Science isn't a body of archived facts; it's the path we follow to acquire new knowledge

#quote
#what-is-science
#define-science




# Fitness landscapes

Stewart Brand

Fitness landscapes express so much so economically.

The first time I saw one, I knew it was giving me advice on how not to get stuck overadapted -- hence overspecialized -- on some local peak of fitness, when whole mountain ranges of opportunity could be glimpsed in the distance.



#edge




# Explanation even if it doesn't

Nicholas Humphrey

Sometimes, the elegant answer is wrong.

Given the sequence 2, 4, 6, 8, what rule would you guess is operating to generate the series? There are several theoretically possible answers. One would be the simple rule: take the previous number, x, and compute x + 2. But equally valid for these data would be the much more complicated rule: Take the previous number, x, and compute -1/44x^3 + 3/11x^2 + 34/11

For the sequence as given so far, the first rule is clearly the more elegant. But suppose we looked further, and we find that the next number in the sequence is 8.91, and the next after that is 8.67. Now, the second rule fits nicely. 



#edge







# Commitment

Richard Thaler

It is a fundamental principle of economics that a person is always better off if they have more alternatives to choose from. But this principle is wrong. There are cases when I can make myself better by restricting my future choices and committing myself to a specific course of action.

A Denver rehabilitation clinic whose clientele consisted of wealthy cocaine addicts offered a "self-blackmail" strategy. Patients were offered an opportunity to write a self-incriminating letter, which would be delivered if and only if the patient, who would be tested on a random schedule, was found to have used cocaine. Most patients would now have a very strong incentive to stay off drugs; they were committed. 

#edge







# Language and Natural selection

Keith Devlin

How did grammar arise?

Anyone who has traveled abroad knows that to communicate basic needs, desires, and intentions to people in your vicinity concerning objects within sight, a few referring words together with gestures suffice. The only grammar required is to occasionally juxtapose two words. Anthropologists refer to such simple word-pairing communication system as a protolanguage.

But to communicate about things not in the here-and-now, you need more. Effectively planning future joint activities needs pretty well all of grammatical structure, particularly if the planning involves more than two people -- with even more demands mane on the grammar if the plan requires coordination among groups not all present at the same place or time.

Given the degree to which human survival depends on our ability to plan and coordinate our actions and to collectively debrief after things go wrong so we avoid repeating our mistakes, it's clear that grammatical structure is hugely important to Homo Sapiens. Indeed, many argue that it's our defining characteristic. But communication, while arguably the killer app for grammar, clearly cannot be what put it into the gene pool in the first place, and for a very simple reason. Since grammar is required in order for verbal utterances to convey ideas more complex than is possible with protolanguage, it comes into play only when the brain can form such ideas. These considerations lead to what is accepted as the Standard Explanation of language acquisition. 

1. Brains (or the organs that became brains) first evolved to associate motor responses to sensory input stimuli. 

2. In some creatures, brains became more complex, performing a mediating role between input stimuli and motor responses.

3. In some of those creatures, the brain became able to override automatic stimulus-response sequences. 

4. In Homo Sapiens, and to a lesser extent in other species, the brain acquired the ability to function offline, effectively running simulations of actions without the need for sensory input stimuli and without generating output responses. 

Stage 4 is when the brain acquires grammar. What we call grammatical structure is in fact a descriptive/communicative manifestation of a mental structure for modeling the world. 

This explanation also tells us where the brain got its capacity for mathematical thinking. Mathematical thinking is essentially another manifestation of the brain's simulation capacity, but in quantitative/relational/logical terms rather than descriptive/communicative. 


#edge
#explanation
#language-acquisition




# evolutionary genetics and the conflicts of human social life

Steven Pinker

The mechanisms of natural selection gives rise to a vast number of principles about social life.
Pinker does a great job of summarizing natural selection.

Complex life is a product of natural selection, which is driven by competition among replicators. The outcome depends on which replicators best mobilize the energy and materials necessary to copy themselves and on how rapidly they can make copies which in turn can replicate. The first aspect of the competition may be called survival, metabolism, or somatic effort; the second, replication or reproductive effort. Life at every scale, from RNA and DNA to whole organisms, implements features that execute -- and constantly trade off -- these two functions. 

Among life's tradeoffs is whether to allocate resources (energy, food, risk, time) to pumping out as many offspring as possible and letting them fend for themselves or eking out fewer descendants and enhancing the chances of survival and reproduction of each one. The continuum represents the degree of parental investment expended by the organism. 

Since parental investment is finite, investing organisms face a second tradeoff, between investing resources in a given offspring and conserving those resources to invest in its existing or potential siblings. 

Because of the essential differences between the sexes -- females produce fewer but more expensive gametes -- the females of most species invest more in offspring than do the males, whose investment is often close to zero. Mammalian females in particular have opted for massive investment, starting with internal gestation and lactation. In some species, including Homo Sapiens, the males may invest too, though less than females.

Natural selection favors the allocation of resources not just from parents to offspring but among genetic kin, such as siblings and cousins. Just as a gene that encourages a parent to invest in offspring will be favoring a copy of itself that sits inside those offspring, so a gene that encourages an organism to invest in a brother or cousin will, some proportion of the time, be helping a copy of itself and will be selected in proportion to the benefits conferred, the costs incurred, and the degree of genetic relatedness. 

I've just reviewed the fundamental features of life on Earth, with the barest mention of contingent facts about our own species -- only that we're mammals with male parental investment. I'll add a second: that we're a brainy species that deals with life's conundrums not just with fixed adaptations selected over evolutionary time but also with facultative adaptations (cognition, language, socialization) that we deploy in our lifetimes and whose products we share via culture. 

From these deep principles about the nature of the evolutionary process, one can deduce a vast amount about the social life of our species.

Conflict is part of the human condition. Notwithstanding religious myths, human life is never free of friction. All societies have some degree of differential prestige and status, inequality of power and wealth, punishment, sexual regulations, sexual jealousy, hostility to other groups, and conflict within the group, including violence, rape, and homocide. Our cognitive and moral obsessions track these conflicts. In the real world, our life stories are largely stories of conflict: the hurts, guilts, and rivalries inflicted by friends, relatives, and competitors. 

The main refuge from this conflict is the family -- collections of individuals with an evolutionary interest in one another's flourishing. Thus we find that traditional societies are organized around kinship and that political leaders, from great emperors to tinpot tyrants, seek to transfer power to their offspring. Extreme forms of altruism, such as donating an organ or making a risky loan, are typically offered to relatives, as are bequests of wealth after death. Nepotism constantly threatens social institutions such as religions, governments, and business that compete with the instinctive bonds of family.







[christopher thinking]
Ben Shapiro role theory
Be a good father
Christopher: be a good evolutionary human being (mentally simulate. reciprocity. understand the deep evolutionary pressures and the local mammalian pressures. speak with deep grammar...think about being a traveler abroad and only using protolanguage, something about this situation is deeply unsatisfying). 


#edge
#evolution
#natural-selection




# redundancy reduction 

richard dawkins


Your grandmother is only one of the countless images that a brain is capable of recognizing. If there were a specific neuron for everything we can recognize, we would have a combinatorial explosion. If sensory recognition worked on the grandmother principle, the number of specific recognition neurons for all possible combinations of nerve impluses would exceed the number of atoms in the universe. 

Redundancy reductions are the answer.

Claude Shannon, inventor of information theory, coined "redundancy" as a kind of inverse of information. In English, "q" is always followed by "u," so the "u" can be omitted without loss of information. It is redundant. Wherever redundancy occurs in a message, the message can be more economically recoded without loss of information -- although with some loss in capacity to correct errors. Barlow suggested that at every stage in sensory pathways there are mechanisms tuned to eliminate redundancy. 

The world at time t is not greatly different from the world at time t - 1. Therefore it is not necessary for sensory systems continously to report the state of the world. They need only signal changes, leaving the brain to assume that everything not reported remains the same. If a neuron is signaling temperature, for example, the rate of firing is not, as one might naively suppose, proportional to the temperature. Instead, firing rate increases only when there is a change in temperature. The same is true of neurons signaling brighntess, loudness, pressure, and so on. 

[christopher note: and everything gets filtered through a log scale so that we perceive everything as linear increases]

If every retinal cell faithfully reported its light value to the brain, the brain would be bombarded with a hugely redundant message. Great economies can be achieved if most of the impulses reaching the brain come from pixel cells lying along edges in the scene. The brain then assumes uniformity in the spaces between the edges. 



#edge
#redundancy





# The seeds of historical dominance

David Pizzaro

One of the most elegant explanations I have ever encountered in the social sciences comes courtesy of Jared Diamond. 

Diamond attempts to answer an enourmously complex and historically controversial question -- why certain societies achieved historical dominance over others -- by appealing to a basic set of differences in the physical environments from which these societies emerged, such as differences in the availability of plants and animals suitable for domestication. 

These differences, Diamond argues, gave rise to a number of specific advantages, such as greater immunity to disease, that were directly responsible for the historical success of some societies. 



[christopher thinking]
Interesting to note how different people tried to "explain" things
I like the science way. Here is a thing. What are some mechanisms that could generate that thing?


#edge
#explanation





























# For every 100 girls

https://www.scribd.com/document/482273806/For-Every-100-Girls-2020-Update


https://www.edweek.org/media/every100girls-32boys.pdf


keywords

- male female differences

- discrepancies

- gender wage gap

- "females make 70 cents to every male dollar"



#sjw
#anti-woke
#discrepancy
#sex-differences
#misogyny







# family annoyance

Repeat questions

Administrative questions

Like I'm 5. "Hey there is a better way to do that and I need to tell you." "Hey I need to make sure everything is under my control."
- walk with me to car to put my wallet away
- when I drive, you open the passenger front door and lock it, scared that I won't
- packing up my room, you literally came in and watched and asked if things in the room were mine
- Do you want an extension chord for your computer?
- While I'm reading, "hey do you want the light brighter?"
- down the stairs while working, are you cold do you want the fireplace on?
- morning up to work. why don't you drive me to work so that you can have a car?


You don't leave me alone
- Beach days, you always go to concession stand or first watch
- the day I stay home to work and have lunch on my own...you come back and make lunch while I'm there

Question everything I do
- why sleep so much?
- why eat so little? why eat so much?

Chew with mouth open
- eat ice cream by cranking spoon down on bowl

Constantly moving. 
- get home from beach. you can't just sit down and chill. you have to adjust everything in the house.

If staying with parents, no more than 3 days. Don't stay in same place as them. Trip also means all day in airport and 30 dollars for 3 chicken tenders


#family-annoyance


























# growth vs fixed mindsets have no effect

Alex Burgoyne Meta Analysis: they have no effect

https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_citation&hl=en&user=jG8HQQgAAAAJ&sortby=pubdate&citation_for_view=jG8HQQgAAAAJ:_Qo2XoVZTnwC

According to mindset theory, students who believe their personal characteristics can change—that is, those who hold a growth mindset—will achieve more than students who believe their characteristics are fixed. Proponents of the theory have developed interventions to influence students’ mindsets, claiming that these interventions lead to large gains in academic achievement. Despite their popularity, the evidence for growth mindset intervention benefits has not been systematically evaluated considering both the quantity and quality of the evidence. Here, we provide such a review by (a) evaluating empirical studies’ adherence to a set of best practices essential for drawing causal conclusions and (b) conducting three meta-analyses. When examining all studies (63 studies, N= 97,672), we found major shortcomings in study design, analysis, and reporting, and suggestions of researcher and publication bias: Authors with a financial incentive to report positive findings published significantly larger effects than authors without this incentive. Across all studies, we observed a small overall effect: 𝑑̅= 0.05, 95% CI=[0.02, 0.09], which was non-significant after correcting for potential publication bias. No theoretically-meaningful moderators were significant. When examining only studies demonstrating the intervention influenced students’ mindsets as intended (13 studies, N= 18,355), the effect was non-significant: 𝑑̅= 0.04, 95% CI=[-0.01, 0.10]. When examining the highest-quality evidence (6 studies, N= 13,571), the effect was non-significant: 𝑑̅= 0.02, 95% CI=[-0.06, 0.10]. 

We conclude that apparent effects of growth mindset interventions on academic achievement are likely attributable to inadequate study design, reporting flaws, and bias.

#great-study
#growth-mindsets
#growth-mindset
#ob
#social-psych
#interventions































# are you garbage questions

Are you currently using a non-tupperware container as tupperware in your fridge?

When the adults in your family went out to eat to celebrate without the kids, did they go to outback?

Would you take someone elses left overs home from a restaurant?


Are you garbage questions
- Did your parents ever make you throw out a toy they just bought you because you hurt someone with it?
- When you make hot chocolate, do you put the chocolate syrup in first and then the milk, or the milk first and then the syrup?
- Have you eaten a hot dog on two pieces of wonder bread?
- Have you ever gone skiing with jeans?
- Did you ever take a family vacation where multiple cars followed each other?
- Did you eat of TV trays growing up?
- Ever have to call 911 on a family member?
- When you were growing up, did you have old rusty cars parked in your lawn?
- Do you drink milk with dinner?
- Did you continue to go to high school sports games after you graduated?
- Have you or any family members ever been involved in a parade?

#are-you-garbage



















# gdp quote



The gross national product does not allow for the health of our
children, the quality of their education or the joy of their play.
It does not include the beauty of our poetry or the strength
of our marriages, the intelligence of our public debate or the
integrity of our public offi cials. It measures neither our wit
nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither
our compassion nor our devotion to our country, it measures
everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.16



The sacred is not for sale. 





A society that
talks about “creating jobs” as if that’s something only companies can do
will not inspire the great majority of its people to create jobs, for themselves or anyone else.



Wendell Berry calls “tyrannese.”
My impression is that we have seen, for perhaps a hundred and
fi fty years, a gradual increase in language that is either meaningless or destructive of meaning. And I believe that this increasing unreliability of language parallels the increasing disintegration,
over the same period, of persons and communities. . . .



#quote
#economics
#bad-language
#academese
#bad-writing
#philosophy








# barber quote

A scent is to be discovered not announced. 

#quote
#philosophy










# Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

The talent of success is nothing more than doing what you can do well; and doing well whatever you do, without a thought of fame.

The highest exercise of imagination is not to devise what has no existence, but rather to perceive what really exists, though unseen by the outward eye--not creation, but insight.

Simplicity in character, in manners, instyle; in all things the supreme excellence is simplicity.

#quote
#philosophy











# Reflections on the human condition



# Quotes - reflections on the human condition

1)

Both iron discipline and blind faith strive to eliminate the pause of hesitation before action, while the discipline that humanizes and civilizes aims at widening the interval between impulse and execution.

2)

Art is older than production for use, and play older than work. Man was shaped less by what he had to do than by what he did in playful moments. It is the child in man that is the source of his uniqueness and creativeness, and the playground is the optimal milieu for the unfolding of his capacities and talents.

3) 

It is a juvenile notion that a society needs a lofty purpose and a shining vision to achieve much. Both in the marketplace and on the battlefield men who set their hearts on toys have often displayed unequaled initiative and drive.

4) 

The central task of education is to implant a will and facility for learning; it should produce not learned but learning people. The truly human society is a learning society, where grandparents, parents, and children are students together.

5)

It is the malady of our age that the young are so busy teaching us that they have no time left to learn.

6)

Since man has to finish and "make" himself, there are unavoidably greater differences between individual men than between individual animals.

One must also expect chance to play a greater role in the lives of men than in the lives of animals. In the unfolding of the individual's life, chance is everything. In a vigorous society chance and example have full play, and in such a society the talented are likely to be lucky.

7)

The untalented are more at ease in a society that gives them valid alibis for not achieving than in one where opportunities are abundant. In an affluent society, the alienated who clamor for power are largely untalented people who cannot make use of the unprecedented opportunities for self-realization, and cannot escape the confrontation with an ineffective self.

8)

The education explosion has produced a horde of would-be uncommon people who want to live uncommon lives and do uncommon deeds. Hence the present appetite for historymaking on campuses and in intellectual cliques.

9)

We all have private ails. The troublemakers are they who need public cures for their private ails. 

10)

If a society is to preserve its stability and a degree on continuity, it must know how to keep its adolescents from imposing their tastes, attitudes, values, and fantacies on everyday life. At present, most nations are threatened more by their juveniles within than by enemies without.

Perhaps a modern society can remain stable only by eliminating adolescence, by giving its young, from the age of ten, the skills, responsibilities, and rewards of grownups, and the opportunities for action in all spheres of life. Adolescence should be a time of useful action, while book learning and scholarship should be a preoccupation of adults. 

11)

Is there a self-aware person who does not squirm when he remembers what he was like at twenty?

12)

In human affairs every solution serves only to sharpen the problem, to show us more clearly what we are up against. There are no final solutions.


13)

In this country, the prestige and rewards of intellectual pursuits have risen so sharply that many individuals with superb talents for wheeling and dealing and for building industrial empirres are now throwing their weight around in the universities. These people want to act, command, and make history, but being cast in the role of intellectuals they cannot face the reality of their innermost craving. They need the sanction of a holy cause or an ideal before they can let themselves go. They will grab at any idea or word floating in the air and employ it as an incantation to conjure action out of the void. It is the presence of these activist intellectuals which renders words and ideas dangerous. 

14)

It is a paradox of the post-industrial age that, despite its technical ominipotence, it is as domainated by words and magic as any primitive tribe. A haze of empty words, coming from the word factories of the universities, is corrupting the air of our ailing cities. The young lurch not so much from one illusion to another as from one cliche to another.

15)

They who lack talent expect things to happen without effort. They ascribe failure to a lack of inspiration or ability, or to misfortune, rather than to insufficient application. At the core of every true talent there is an awareness of the difficulties inherent in any achievement, and the confidence that by persistence and patience something worthwhile will be realized. 

16)

People who cannot grow want to leap; they want short cuts to fame, fotune, and happiness.

17)

It is to the creative mind only that a common occurrence can be as revealing as an outstanding event.

18)

The genuine creator creates something that has a life of its own, something that can exist and function without him. This is true not only of the writer, artist, and scientist but of creators in other fields. The creative teacher is he who, in the words of Comenius, "teaches less and his students learn more." A creative organizer creates an organization that can function well without him. When a genuine leader has done his work, his followers will say, "We have done it ourselves," and feel that they can do great things without great leaders. With the noncreative it is the other way around: in whatever they do they arrange things so that they themselves become indispensable.

19)

Any empty head is not really empty; it is stuffed with rubbish. Hence the difficulty of forcing anything into an empty head.

20)

What monstrosities would walk the streets were some people's faces as unfinished as their minds.

21)

Language was invented to ask questions. Answers may be given by grunts and gestures, but questions must be spoken. Social stagnation results not from a lack of answers but from the absence of the impulse to ask questions.

22)

Both the revolutionary and the creative individual are perpetual individuals. The revolutionary does not grow up because he cannot grow, while the creative individual cannot grow up because he keeps growing.

23)

It is doubtful whether there can be such a thing as collective shame. Collective resentment yes, and of course collective pride and elation -- but not shame. The association with others is almost always felt as an association with our betters, and to sin with our betters cannot be productive of a crushing feeling. 

24)

How frighteningly frew are the persons whose death would spoil our appetite and make the world seem empty.

25)

Sometimes it seems that people hear best what we do not say.

26)

No matter what our achievements might be, we think well of ourselves only in rare moments.  We need people to convince us that we are not as bad as we think we are.

27)

What we are looking for is not people who agree with us but people who think well of us and know how to express it. We cherish such people though they disagree with us.


# Quotes - Working and Thinking on the Waterfront

1)

To an intellectual, words -- parliament, democracy, dictatorship, fasicm -- loom large. To the general run of people the chief question is whether, and how smoothly, a thing works. 

2)

We talked about the backward countries and how terribly handicapped an American is when dealing with them. It is hopeless to try to win the weak over to our side. We have no ideology to impart, no faith to propagate, and no pride we can share with others. We have much to give in skills and tangible things. 

3)

What surprises me again and again in this country is the rapidity with which an experience is savored and exhausted. Each new fashion, vogue, and attitude is pushed up the hill with utter abandon, and once at the top it is allowed to roll back and into the ashcan. The senselessness of it si monumental. 

4) 

When a poor country wants to modernize itself in a hurry, it must know how to induce its people to work for words.

5)

During the whole day I have not spoken half a dozen sentences yet I feel as if I had been engaged in an interminable dialogue. The optimal milieu for me is to be surrounded by people and not be part of them.

6)

We sometimes assume that inner contradictions, if severe enough, may bring about the breakdown of a society or a system. Actually, vigor and creative flow have their source in internal strains and tensions. It is the pull of opposite poles that stretches souls. And only stretched souls make music.

7)

He is a typical lesser intellectual: interested in ideas, but without an inkling of what an original idea is. 

8)

Fair play with others is primarily the practice of not blaming them for anything that is wrong with us.

We tend to rub our guilty conscience against others the way we wipe dirty fingers on a rag.


9)

In the shaping of life, chance and the ability to respond to chance are everything.

10)

His directness and lucidity come as a surprise in these days of existentialist double-talk. One is no longer used to writing that says exactly what it means. 



#quote
#philosophy
#eric-hoffer




























#
#
# the only one that matters: misdirection with everyday items ("clearly used for...")

Ah there's a girl walking in with one of those styrofoam containers you get from Outback steakhouse, clearly used for imprisoning the souls of all the men she's captured. 






1) Out of context or unexpected

Conan and heart outside bear
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=389nJrZjK1w

I said I wanted pancakes (2:47)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=De8TECO7JW4

Listen, ever since she was a young boy growing up in Brooklyn...



2) Bring back / connect to something that was brought up earlier



3) Metaphor 


My kitchen gets more use than Mel Gibson used his sword in Braveheart. (compare to Movie characters that people will know). 

Whose line:
- "If you know what I mean."



4) Extra phrase

I don't understand why people are still getting married. 3 out of 4 marriages don't work out. "Is this the line to lose half my shit? Great!"

Everyone I knew going into that major was subsequently working at sea world when they graduated. "Ya when I studied marine science at USD I examined how different rates of phosphorous effected plant growth in the san diego bay." "That's great sir, now we're gonna need you to clean the whale cage."



5) Great tags

"if you know what I mean."

"at 1:35...at 1:36..."

"there's an old italian legend/saying that..."

"one of them uses moisturizer..and the other one needs it."

[following a statement]. "And if elected, I will ensure..." "Ask now what..."

"I can only imagine...in some vivid detail."

"Although it didn't look great, at least it was hard to make, took all my time, and made my shoulder hurt for 2 days."

"Have you been eating too many sugar cereals?"



6) "You look like" and insults

The bottoms of his shoes are red so that he can get away cleanly after he murders the person that gave him that haircut.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qgtenO4l7k

you look like you put your whole mouth over the drinking fountain

you look like someone that has a blue pacard in their car that lets them park wherever they want

you look like a girl whose never taken a solo profile picture

I would prefer that you ask for my permission so that I could say "no." 

You have the brain of a 4 year old boy and I bet he was glad to get rid of it.

There's no need to bring your family into this.

New shoes huh. Lot of good that will do, you still have the same face.





7) pure jokes

What's the difference between 365 used condoms and a tire?
- one's a good year, and one's a great year


If a girl sleeps with 10 guys, she's a slut. But if a guy does that...he's definitely gay


Allergies? Cowards and weak-willed women.
Any history of mental illness? I have an uncle that does yoga.


#humor
#social-animal


























# biden never forget. this is why i get upset with democrats

Loan Forgiveness is not really an accurate name.  It's really a debt transfer to the working class taxpayer, who will be stuck with the debt. I think that's why they named it "forgiveness," so people wouldn't catch on.

#anti-woke
#never-forget
#democrats-vs-republicans



























# quotes



It is what you read when you do not have to that determines who you will be when you cannot help it.

I have the simplest tastes. I am always satisfied with the best.

When I was young I thought that money was the most important thing in life; now that I am old I know that it is. 

I never travel without my diary. One should always have something sensational to read on the train. 

The theory is variable rich but function poor.

I mean what happens if Nicholas Cage walks in here and steals this national treasure?

Are we about to become patrick mohomies?

Ever since I learned that my male member was going to give me no piece I decided to give it no rest in return. 

I've worked myself up from nothing to a state of extreme poverty. 

You've got the brain of a 2 year old boy and I bet he was glad to get rid of it.

I think you've been eating too much sugar cereals. 

They put 2 and 2 together and came up with five.

It's not in my nature to be mysterious...but I can't talk about it and I can't talk about why.

You gonna go play some 5 on 1 there boys? Distribute some free literature...

You must not know my history. Let me tell you a little bit about me. I've...
no more fucks to give
my fucks have all run dry
I trained a mean fuck army but they all fucking died
...
...
I tried to go fuck shopping but there are no more fucks to buy. 


next time try to find something red to wear.

But if you are hear who is guarding the gates of hell?



# responses

No fair-minded view of yours would say that.

Perhaps then you would have the ghost of a point, but until then you don't. 

By all means.

I could summarize your view of me in a way that you would agree with. You could not return the favor. 

I quarrel with that statement.

It's difficult to answer politely a question that ends with, "your comments are banal." I would consider that an opinionated statement. Try reformulating it so that there is an actual question there. 

People avoid real issues that are within their own purview and instead adopt pseudo moralistic stances on large scale social issues so they can look good to their neighbors. 



# Songs

The world might not make it through the night - atmosphere
Lazy Daze in California - Language Arts Crew
Nuclear Family - Sweatshop union
Feather - Nujabes




#quotes
#quote
#philosophy




















# quote


Those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could not hear the music.

Nietzsche


#quote
#philosophy































# patrice o neal




# The patrice mindset.

- two conflicts for men: fisherman story
++ we're attractive for being good fishermen. When you change us into boring dudes in a relationship, we become less attractive
++ just like how a women needs to stay physically attractive, we need to keep our charisma by flirting with other women

- everything a man wants to be naturally is not righteous
- provide guidance. Dominate the mind.

Patrice on Marc Maron. Watch the entire thing.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2KutX6MNFU

Patrice on O and A episode 46, Koala Sandwich. 2:50:25 when he gives caller advice
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bN79KVCJl9A

# Honesty

Honest versus liars. He just wants to be honest, straightforward.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUDmOhd7ZHY

Honest versus pretenders. He just wants to be honest. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m2K6I23hETs

# Indifference

Always act like it wouldn't bother you if she left.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=21AU-sudsnU

# The same confidence & calmness you have toward whatever skill you have needs to be at play around girls

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZC8O-SH6gmY
2:16:39

Listen from about 1:30:00 and on if you want to hear the entire set up

Jim Norton:
- Women want to fuck who you are as oppossed to what you look like

Patrice:
- no pick up lines
- the confidence you bring is everything. The same confidence you have when you operate a skill that you are really good at; the same confidence must apply around women. You are better and you control what's going on. You provide guidance.
- Just like a girl needs to keep looking good for her to keep us, we have to keep up our "charisma such that other girls want to fuck us" for us to keep her. 


# Obligations when a girl gets fat vs a guy gets boring

Men want to cheat, innately. We want to chase. Don't make us feel bad about it, help us by  keeping us turned on throughout life. When you marry a pretty girl and she gets fat, she pulled a banana in the tail pipe on you. I'm no longer obligated to be with you.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yphJIVebYQ0
3:36:00

# Pay

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0l6S9OvaIpw
2:30 and on philosophizing about hookers
- "it feels weird to pay for it"
- when you do not invest for it? time, money, charm, you are always investing
- once you pay, it makes it real. Just like how when a girl hooks up with you early, now you can be real
- it's an honest exchange

# Prioritizing what we want vs what she wants

2:48:39 equating charm and pussy
- Girl: "I don't have casual sex"
- "Well I don't have causal conversations. Why is your concept that you protect better than mine?"

# In response to "girls should be allowed to wear whatever they want."

"Men should be able to handle seeing women naked. Get over it."

That movement usually doesn't acknowledge:
- our restraint
- girls flirt with guys by showing skin. That's all they can do.

Our restraint:
- If a girl cuts me off in a car and gives me that, "yeah what are you going to do" look, I have to take it.
- We give you that freedom. That's my restraint not to pull the car over.

Girls flirting:
- How do girls flirt?
- Patrice girlfriend: just a t shirt in front of the tv
- My girlfriend: put my hand on her boob. Literally come over and hump me.

So, you showing skin is how you flirt. You have freedom to assault us.
- You get to freely do what you do
- Yet we're supposed to show unbelievable restraint?
- we just want you to acknowledge that it's hard.





# I want my loneliness

Patrice on wanting to be lonely.


30:14 - would rather be alone in your house reflecting. I love you girl, but I need you to leave me alone with my loneliness, and I need you to not try to save me from my loneliness. I might be miserable, but I'd rather be alone. I don't want to talk to anybody.

My loneliness is so important to me. 

up until 31:02






# Women want cheating to be a disease. 

++ development
- Men have to develop charm to get pussy. We develop ourselves to get what we want
- Women aren't willing to develop themselves to get what they want, which is fidelity
- They call us "diseased" for it. No bitch, develop yourself. Find a way to keep me with the same passion that I developed to get you. 
- We compel them to open their legs. But they can't compel us to open our hearts. They instead write books saying it is a disease.

++ disease
- If I call you fat, I'm degrading your livelihood because fat is your natural embodiment.
- Well, cheating is what I want and is natural to me. I want to fuck a lot of women. By calling cheating a disease, you are degrading my livelihood.

1:05:45
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TJc41wygByc






https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTjWNaNag4U
- 48:00

# Quit being a sweetie pie

3:15:00



# another great vid on patrice logic overall

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwuEZjn4oPk




#humor
#philosophy
#patrice-o-neal
#quote




















# slow progression over time, accumulating resources, then dominate

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/6pedAl7Zp2I

#quote
#philosophy
#compounding
#preparation





















# quotes

"To laugh often and much; to win the respect of intelligent people and the affection of children...to leave the world a better place...to know even one life has breathed easier because you have lived. This is to have succeeded."
 ~ Ralph Waldo Emerson



In college you learn how to think and how to learn, in graduate school you learn how to think clearly.

That question has a long way to go before it is even naive. - Christopher Hitchens

There were 50 other ways to phrase that question that would have been stronger. - Christopher Hitchens

He can compress the most words into the smallest idea of any man I know. - Abraham Lincoln

People who think they know everything are a great annoyance to those of us who do. - Isaac Asimov

All the things I like to do are either immoral, illegal, or fattening. - Alexander Woollcott

Part of the money went for gambling, horses, and women. The rest I spent foolishly. - George Raft

Chase the god of wisdom, the goddess of wealth will become jealous and find you.

Nature gave us one tongue, but two ears, so that we may listen twice as much as we speak.

The best revenge is massive success.

Why do we have an ice cream scoop? For the same reason we have lingerie, it is reserved exclusively for intimate encounters, to trigger excitement.

A sea squirt is born with a brain and swims about to find a good place to live. Once it does so, it locks itself in and eats its brain. Brains are prediction machines that use past information to predict future events important for survival; once that is of no use, they are no longer needed.

Peace. It is not to be in a place with no noise, trouble, or hard work. It is to be in the midst of those things and still have calm in your heart.

People undergoing bodily therapies learn something, people on drugs don't. 

Be prepared, but never overblown. If you always knew what to expect then there would be no reason to experience.

The really efficient laborer will be found not to crowd his day with work, but will saunter to his task surrounded by a wide halo of ease and leisure. There will be a wide margin for relaxation to his day. His only earnest to secure the kernels of time and does not exaggerate the value of the husk. Those who work much do not work hard.

It's not what you look at that matters, but what you see.

True freedom is impossible without a mind set free by discipline.

Education allows your mind to turn on the world. Stop thinking that your mind only receives information. It creates and makes inferences.

Education gives you the creativity and imagination to stand in someone else's shoes, even if they don't agree with you.

It doesn't matter if you get the right answer if you are solving the wrong problem.

It's easier to identify bad writing from good writing rather than great writing from good writing. So it is with everything else in life.

A true artist can manipulate a dull scene into something beautiful. A true student can manipulate dull information into something fascinating.

Our intuitions about reality have not evolved at the subatomic or planetary level. We operate with the world only at the human level. Most scientific findings should be deeply counter intuitive.

This is the best restaurant hands down. Which do you go to with your hands up?

Never correct me, I'm an American and America is never wrong.

The standard pace is for chumps.

You will become way less concerned with what other people think of you when you realize how seldom they do.

Everything looks like failure in the middle.

Suffering is often worse in imagination than in reality.

The quest for certainty blocks the search for meaning.

I'm not looking for the best players Craig, I'm looking for the right ones.

Don't forget your game.

The true things he says are usually irrelevant, and the relevant things he says are usually false.

I didn't malign her, I told the truth about her, which was maligning.

Anxiety and success don't go together.

There are two tragedies in life. One is to lose your heart's desire. The other is to gain it.

Few people think more than two or three times a year. I've made an international reputation by thinking once or twice a week.

Imagine how hard physics would be if atoms could think.

Did you just order a five dollar shake?

Just because I rock doesn't mean I'm made of stone.

Well this is just a fist, but it creates a real mess when I start throwing it around.

Me. Fiction is fun because you don't know where the story is headed. Non-fiction is fun because you think you know where the story is headed, but you are often wrong.

Grandma: Writing must be easy for you, you do it so well. Nothing I do well comes easy to me.

Amateurs practice until they get it right. Professionals practice until they can't get it wrong.

What a terrible thing to say. If I cared about your opinion I might take that negatively, thankfully I don't.

You can say it with eloquence, style, with fury and anger, with economy of word and clever turn of phrase, but that doesn't make it a valid argument.

Never begin an idea with a blank sheet of paper.

Me. Confidence is being able to respond to the question, "How did the researchers do A or B in this paper?" with "...they didn't."

It's amazing how relaxing it is not to pretend to know more than you do.

One of the best ways to solve a complex problem is to reduce it to a problem already solved.

A gentleman is one who never hurts anyone's feeling unintentionally.

Me. Most people find pleasure in pursuing challenging goals. I find pleasure in knowing that you cannot handle them.

The art of being wise is the art of knowing what to overlook.

Confrontation, the only thing that brings life to thought. - Christopher Hitchens in a live video on Malcom X

I try to look into all the different fields for what they excel at and borrow whatever I can learn from them about how to think about various paradigms and then even to see the same paradigms prop up in different fields that are widely separated and nobody knows that the same way of thinking occurs across them all. - Eric Weinstein


"It is usually futile to try to talk facts and analysis to people who are enjoying a sense of moral superiority in their ignorance.” - Thomas Sowell

#quote
#philosophy
#quotes



















# christopher theory - too much "who knows what" 


the growing number of females in academia has been discussed in terms of "gossip at scale"

Here is another thing that will happen:
clingy "everyone know everything" stuff


Anita's Geekbot:

Geekbot
APP  1:18 PM
Hi Christopher, I am Geekbot :wave:
@Anita
 created the workflow Monday Watercooler and I am here to help get you started. I will send you a DM tomorrow at 9:00 AM (in your local timezone). After you answer all the questions i will post your answers to #general, this way all your team members can stay synced.
Check out our guides about chat commands and read up on how to report to compose even better updates.



Geekbot
APP  9:00 AM
Starting Monday Watercooler
Quick Action
The only thing that travels faster than light is weekends :flushed: but tell me — how was yours?
What did you do this weekend?




UGH. LEAVE ME ALONE. 



Connecting people is about the physical sensation of being around a human, not the content of the information.
Information does not matter; touch does; sensation does; emotion does. 


#christopher-theory
#christopher-thinking
















# can't do knowledge work for 8 hours a day





There’s an ancient biblical, “Never hire a guy who’s really into golf”.

Effectively zero WFH knowledge workers do 8 hours of hard work a day, much less 4 or 5.

A lot of people lament that technology was supposed to bring 10 hour work weeks and lives of luxury. And it did, just for a select portion of the population with specific skills.

For the last 10 or so years, any smart kid could pursue CS or tech-adjacent work (UI/UX, PM etc) and get an incredibly cushy life of relative luxury.

It’s more of a testament to the power of FAANG that they can waste so much money and still gush $XB in FCF.





Good knowledge work can only be done so many hours of the day.



Two of the most productive professional writers of the later 20th Century, John Updike and Stephen King, had a standard schedule of writing hard from 8 am to noon, for a total of four hours of work per day.

Updike played a lot of golf in the remaining time.




'A Day in the Life of Roald Dahl' - "Roald Dahl had a very strict daily routine. He would eat breakfast in bed and open his post. At 10.30 a.m. he would walk through the garden to his writing hut and work until 12 p.m. when he went back to the house for lunch (one and a half hours) – typically, a gin and tonic followed by Norwegian prawns with mayonnaise and lettuce. At the end of every meal, Roald and his family had a chocolate bar chosen from a red plastic box.

After a snooze, he would take a flask of tea back to the writing hut and work from 4 p.m. till 6 p.m (two hours). He would be back at the house at exactly six o’clock, ready for his dinner."

So, 3.5 hours of hard work per day for Roald Dahl, whose literary estate was recently sold for something like $600 million.

I suspect we could also find a lot of failed writers who only worked from 8 until noon.

And a lot of failed writers who worked twice as much.



#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen
#economics

























# christopher theory - no talking to females in orgs. perceptual error



You often hear women say, "women are so oppressed. In the workplace, people will ignore what we say in meetings. Our opinions are less valued than men." 

I think this is a function of, "in the workplace, other people do not have to respond to your nonsense in the same way they would in a bar." 

Outside work, men will react to whatever a woman says in an effort to please her. She can speak total nonsense, but men will go along with it because they want to screw. 

Inside work, men stop doing this. 

It isn't that men are completely ignoring what women have to say. It is that they no longer bend over backwards to respond to everything you utter. 






#christopher-theory
#christopher-thinking


















# christopher research study: time scales questionnaire framing


Emotions experienced during a visit to Disneyland may not coincide with the emotions remembered about the trip after the visit is over.
Take this idea and apply it everywhere. 
Cognitive model
Management implications
Measurement implications
Which constructs is this true and not true for?


HISTORIANS WORK OVER LONG PERIODS OF TIME
OTHER TYPES OF JOBS WORK OVER SECONDS.
People who focus on past vs future
How does that effect one's cognitive functioning?




#research-idea
#christopher-thinking
#christopher-theory


















# regulation blocks those of us who want to be productive

As regulation, land use restrictions, NIMBYism and licensing rules raised the cost of disruptive innovation and protested incumbents in the real world, talent and venture capital migrated to the virtual world. Calls for regulation there are now deafening, often coming from the new incumbents. Attempts to apply the lessons and techniques of virtual innovation to the biotech and greentech fields have proved much less effective because of the preexisting regulatory guardrails in each. Regulation, whether justified by safety, the environment, or incumbent political power, serves to limit productivity growth and the growth of prosperity in a society. When we empower regulators we restrict opportunity. That matters most to those who are not yet prosperous but who wish to be.

#quotes
#quote
#philosophy
#marginal-revolution
#economics
#creativity


















# clean your room


The illustrious ancients, when they wished to make clear and to propagate the highest virtues in the world, put their states in proper order. Before putting their states in proper order, they regulated their families. Before regulating their families, they cultivated their own selves. Before cultivating their own selves, they perfected their souls. Before perfecting their souls, they tried to be sincere in their thoughts. Before trying to be sincere in their thoughts, they extended to the utmost their knowledge. Such investigation of knowledge lay in the investigation of things, and in seeing them as they really were. When things were thus investigated, knowledge became complete. When knowledge was complete, their thoughts became sincere. When their thoughts were sincere, their souls became perfect. When their souls were perfect, their own selves became cultivated. When their selves were cultivated, their families became regulated. When their families were regulated, their states came to be put into proper order. When their states were in proper order, then the whole world became peaceful and happy.

Here is a sound moral and political philosophy within the compass of a paragraph.

#quote
#quotes
#philosophy
#grouped-ideas















# Blanchard et al. "Making sense of humor at work"

Humor at work scale

keywords

- survey development

- humor at work items


#humor













# brahmin

It is honorable to understand the world.
It is honorable to live simply.

#fundamentals
#quote
#philosophy





# tim dillon

My life is none of my business. Have principles. Have integrity.
What happens along the way I cannot control.

You can be useful doing X. Who cares if you enjoy it.

#quote
#philosophy
#tim-dillon











# Psych of human performance in space

https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9780429440854


keywords

- psychology of performance

- space


#psych-of-performance
#spaceflight



















# Niv "The primacy of behavioral research..."

We can learn about cognition from behaviors.

keywords

- behavior vs cognitive

- inferring mental activity is tricky business




#attitudes-vs-behaviors




















# Covid data

https://twitter.com/NAChristakis/status/1239204599959093250


keywords

- covid data

- Nicholas christakis






















# Academic writing

http://www.phrasebank.manchester.ac.uk/being-critical/


keywords

- how to phrase transitions

- how to phrase academic articles

- scholarly writing


#academic-writing
















# Coetic people science briefs

https://coetichr.com/people-science/psbs/


#coetic






























# Glenn Loury and Meritocracy guy




Medicine:

- a lot of specialists

- a lot of technology

- we can transplant a heart

- we can built an artificial heart




- we don't know whether it is better for your heart health

- to exercise intensively for an hour once a week

- or moderately 3 times a week

- we don't have the army of public health workers and nurse practitioners and infrustructure to ask and answer those questions.




People specialize into elites. The big jobs go to the elite of the elite. We don't have an army of nutritionist or nurse practitioner jobs.




How do you create a bunch of jobs using mid-skilled workers and low cost techniques? Exercise facilities, minimal training nutritionists and nurse practitioners. That's not what our health system is.




People are admired and hired into Universities increasingly based on mastering a set of techniques rather than having something true to say about important problems. 


#meritocracy
#glenn-loury






















# how people I've met think about research


How Nikos talks:
- here are the assumptions in the literature

How Anita talks:
- here is what businesses are doing

How I like to talk:
- here are false beliefs I see people holding about human nature
- here are common problems I see in work life


#christopher-thinking






















# Louis ck philosophy - reviewers always suck

Being too engaged with your audience or your critics is the worst thing for a writer.

#philosophy
#quote









# Louis ck philosophy - be ok with boredom / silence /quiet

The thing that people are afraid of more than experience is silence. Quiet. Get used to nothing. The awful feeling that makes you grab for a distraction is so valuable if you can sit in it; because it will lead you to a profound thought. The internet is not resting your brain nor is it using it. There are so many things you can do other than letting the algorithm taking you from one dumb thing to another. 


#philosophy
#quote









# Louis ck philosophy - 


People are looking at the big picture too much. They have opinions about the entire world. You are only responsible for the interactions with people you encounter. How do you treat people? That's all you should be thinking about. 

You can be kind to people you know and the people you encounter. Try to live a life of interaction instead of distraction. Be out and look at folks and treat them ok. 


#philosophy
#quote


















# I'll take a wild ride over a safe but longer one


Men die earlier than women and no one seems to care.

Men certainly don't seem to care, otherwise they would adopt female traits like taking better care of themselves by avoiding risky behavior (such as gun ownership or reckless driving) and going to the doctor more regularly.

Never understood the whining about this.

Yea I drink, I ride motorbikes, I do drugs, I box, I travel to dangerous places and do stupid shit while I'm there, and when I look at my bucket list at least half of the activities on there are things I want to do primarily for the rush and a decent portion of them if they go wrong could kill me (or at least seriously injure me).

I hate going to the doctor and rarely go, my diet has plenty of the bad stuff I'm "not supposed to eat" but is delicious although I am getting better here, and I like to stick my nose where it doesn't belong because I can.

No shit some of this might hurt my mortality rate. But what are the alternatives exactly, sit inside eating salad? No thanks. I'll take a wild ride over a long(er) one.



#philosophy
#quote
#marginal-revolution

































# persistence / inertia in dynamic systems

This is best understood by reading the paper based on which this post was based, let me try explain here as well:

Overall, this just means that economy is following the boom-bust cycle because of the way agents interact and in even in absence of shocks pushing us up and down.

Strong propagation means that some shocks affect the economy for very long time.

Endogenous propagation means that this effect is due to the nature of interaction between economic agents, as opposed because of the nature of the shocks themselves.

Endogenous cyclical behavior means that economy goes up and down on its own, not just because of shocks. Limit cycles is reference to the historical mathematical term that is used to describe this. See picture in the actual post.



Macroeconomic cycles are much more self-reinforcing and correspondingly resistant to shocks and hence longer-lasting than what is commonly thought…

The key idea is that economic developments feature strong endogenous propagation mechanisms which yield endogenous cyclical behavior ala limit cycles.

And:

What is at heart of this behavior? There are three factors that the authors point towards. First is strategic complementarity between economic agents’ behavior, such as the fact that firms want to invest when other firms are investing. Second, you need inertia in individual behavior, so that rapid changes in behavior are costly. And finally, you need dependence on some stock variable such as aggregate amount of capital or durable goods. All of these requirements seem very realistic assumption about the real world.

What are the implications of such model? Among other things this means that in certain periods of time the economy is very robust to negative shocks, because these shocks do not have the power to overturn the forces (resulting from the strategic complementarity between agents) that are pushing economic activity higher. They might push us slightly lower for some period of time, but they don’t turn things completely around. And once their effect fades the economy continues in its previous trajectory. In a sense, this view suggests that economic cycles are more like a titanic.

It also means that there is certain dichotomy in terms of shocks. Shocks ranging in size from “small” to “large-but-not-gigantic” proportions do not change the underlying trajectory of the economy, unless we are already close to turning point in the limit cycle. Meanwhile, truly gigantic shocks, like the global financial crisis, are not just deviation from the medium-term trend defined by the limit cycle, but a change in the medium-term trend.

And in conclusion:

To summarize, the limit cycle view suggests that a powerful enough shock, such as the rebound when economies re-opened after the pandemic recession, can put us on a upward spiral, and that such spiral features such a strong self-reinforcing mechanisms that even large negative shocks cannot derail us. This in contrast to standard DSGE models that feature only relatively weak propagation of shocks, and, crucially, do not feature any medium-term cyclical behavior.


#marginal-revolution
#dynamics
#inertia
#economics
#tyler-cowen
#systems-dynamics
#beer-game
#christopher-theory-of-fluctuations





































# cognitive endurance

Schooling may build human capital not only by teaching academic skills, but by expanding the capacity for cognition itself. We focus specifically on cognitive endurance: the ability to sustain effortful mental activity over a continuous stretch of time. As motivation, we document that globally and in the US, the poor exhibit cognitive fatigue more quickly than the rich across field settings; they also attend schools that offer fewer opportunities to practice thinking for continuous stretches. Using a field experiment with 1,600 Indian primary school students, we randomly increase the amount of time students spend in sustained cognitive activity during the school day—using either math problems (mimicking good schooling) or non-academic games (providing a pure test of our mechanism). Each approach markedly improves cognitive endurance: students show 22% less decline in performance over time when engaged in intellectual activities—listening comprehension, academic problems, or IQ tests. They also exhibit increased attentiveness in the classroom and score higher on psychological measures of sustained attention. Moreover, each treatment improves students’ school performance by 0.09 standard deviations. This indicates that the experience of effortful thinking itself—even when devoid of any subject content—increases the ability to accumulate traditional human capital. Finally, we complement these results with quasi-experimental variation indicating that an additional year of schooling improves cognitive endurance, but only in higher-quality schools. Our findings suggest that schooling disparities may further disadvantage poor children by hampering the development of a core mental capacity.

Here is the full paper by Christina Brown, Supreet Kaur, Geeta Kingdon, and Heather Schofield, via the excellent Kevin Lewis.

I should note that I view this as one of the areas where I feel I have trained myself best.  I recall last year having serious airport travel problems, and a trip that should have taken two hours ended up being almost twelve hours, with uncertainty along the way and two different last-minute improvised airport stops and no lounges.  But I still was able to read, concentrate, and work for the entire period without feeling any major drain.  As for this paper, it is yet another way that schooling teaches the median student something, even though he/she cannot regurgitate any particular lesson on demand.


Tyler, I suspect you "like" these kinds of activities. (Of course, I could be wrong.) I can spend all day on something I like. But it can be dashed difficult to concentrate on something I don't like, even if I'm being paid to do so.

People with drive can achieve great things, but often what's actually happening is people who achieve great things are interested in things that turn out to be great.

Now, getting people to "like" stuff that's deemed useful, that's interesting. Can we get students to like calculus at the expense of, say, liking baseball?


Teaching oneself to like things that are profitable to like is a critical skill.

The mistake today's schooling system does is to encourage students to pursue what they like.


"Any task is as meaningful or soul-sucking as you will make it be."

+10. If you want to succeed, take on the task that no one wants to do and make it yours.




#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen
#job-satisfaction
#philosophy
#quote



























# OB theory is not theory

christopher thinking

strategic core role theory is a good example of "theory is not really theory" in our field; rather, our theory is definitions and taxonomies.

A real theory starts with a phenomenon, and then explains why that phenomenon manifests. It gives an explanation of some pattern or regularity or fact. 

#christopher-thinking
#ob

























# chris williamson guest


You get to elite institutions by dampening down the part of you that enjoys doing X for the sake of doing X. They are really good at convincing themselves that they enjoy doing the things that brought the rewards.
They seem to be bad at describing things that bring them rewards as if that is what brings them fulfillment and poor at describing things that just bring them enjoyment.
All they can say is, "i enjoy doing the things that increase my CV." Wrong. Notice when you feel deep fulfillment and meaningful.



#chris-williamson
#quote
#philosophy

















# chris williamson complicated in the middle theory


Status games in life come from the people in the middle overcomplicating everything.

Philosophy of teaching: students enter college with all sorts of views about the world. Having gained a little bit of knowledge by their 3rd year, they all become relativists and complicate the whole thing.

Chris Williamson:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypokg0La6bc
1:02:40
How to get strong and fit?
The beginner
- lift weights and eat protein
In the middle
- I must optimize my protein timing and recovery and enzymes and grass fed butter and isolation tanks and upside down curls
The expert
- lift weights and eat protein

The sophomore makes everything too complicated. And he energizes unhealthy status games.

Career and life
Beginner
- do something that fulfills you; have a community
Mid
- I must solve all inequities and start a business and blah blah blah
Expert
- do something that fulfills you; have a community


Before enlightenment: chop wood and carry water
After enlightenment: chop wood and carry water


#christopher-theory
#ob-notes
#chris-williamson
#philosophy


















# Direct Instruction is the best means of education

Direct Instruction was pioneered by Siegfried Engelmann in the 1960s and is a scientific approach to teaching. First, a skill such as reading or subtraction is broken down into simple components, then a method to teach that component is developed and tested in lab and field. The method must be explicitly codified and when used must be free of vagueness so students are reliably led to the correct interpretation. Materials, methods and scripts are then produced for teachers to follow very closely. Students are ability not age-grouped and no student advances before mastery. The lessons are fast-paced and feedback and assessment are quick. You can get an idea of how it works in the classroom in this Thales Academy promotional video. Here is a math lesson on counting. It looks odd but it works.

Even though Direct Instruction has been shown to work in hundreds of tests it is not widely used. It’s almost as if education is not about educating.

Some people object that DI is like mass-production. This is a feature not a bug. Mass-production is one of the few ways yet discovered to produce quality on a mass scale. Any method will probably work if a heroic teacher puts in enough blood, sweat and tears but those methods don’t scale. DI scales when used by mortals which is why it consistently beats other methods in large scale tests.

Many teachers don’t like DI when first exposed to it because it requires teacher training and discipline. Teachers are not free to make up their own lesson plans. But why should they be? Lesson plans should be developed by teams of cognitive psychologists, educational researchers and other experts who test them using randomized controlled trials; not made up by amateurs who are subject to small-sample and confirmation bias. Contrary to the critics, however, DI does leave room for teachers to be creative. Actors also follow a script but some are much better than others. Instructors who use DI enjoy being effective.

Quoting the authors of the meta-analysis:

Many current curriculum recommendations, such as those included within the Common Core, promote student-led and inquiry-based approaches with substantial ambiguity in instructional practices. The strong pattern of results presented in this article, appearing across all subject matters, student populations, settings, and age levels, should, at the least, imply a need for serious examination and reconsideration of these recommendations (see also Engelmann, 2014a; Morgan, Farkas, & Maczuga, 2015; Zhang, 2016). It is clear that students make sense of and interpret the information that they are given—but their learning is enhanced only when the information presented is explicit, logically organized, and clearly sequenced. To do anything less shirks the responsibility of effective instruction.



A slew of research shows that direct instruction produces superior results compared to other instructional methods. A new study in the Journal of Labor Economics by Eric Taylor provides more information on how and why. Using a randomized controlled trial, Taylor compares a weak form of direct instruction with student led classrooms in which:

the students are expected to reason through and articulate math concepts with each other,while teachers “facilitate conversations” and “help students express their thoughts” with a “focus on [students’] understanding, rather than on students answering problems correctly”

He finds that direct instruction results in greater student learning. More importantly, however, he also has data on how well teachers understand math and how to teach math and what he finds is that this knowledge is basically only productive when teachers use direct instruction. In other words, teacher skill only produces results when teachers are assigned a task that uses that skill. Student-led classrooms waste teacher skill and so are less productive.



[christopher summary]
This is essentially job analysis but for school/learning the content of a course.
Break it down. Logical. Step by step. Don't progress until mastery. 



Moreover, it matters what is scalable...

Heroes are not Replicable
by  Alex Tabarrok September 27, 2007 at 8:20 am in Data Source Economics Education Film
You know the plot.  Young, idealistic teacher goes to inner-city high school.  Said idealistic teacher is shocked by students who don’t know the basics and who are too preoccupied with the burdens of violence, poverty and indifference to want to learn.  But the hero perseveres and at great personal sacrifice wins over the students using innovative teaching methods and heart.  The kids go on to win the state spelling/chess/mathematics championship.  c.f. Stand and Deliver, Freedom Writers, Dangerous Minds etc.

We are supposed to be uplifted by these stories but they depress me.  If it takes a hero to save an inner city school then there is no hope.  Heroes are not replicable.

What we need to save inner-city schools, and poor schools everywhere, is a method that works when the teachers aren’t heroes.  Even better if the method works when teachers are ordinary people, poorly paid and ill-motivated – i.e. the system we have today. 

In Super Crunchers, Ian Ayres argues that just such a method exists.  Overall, Super Crunchers is a light but entertaining account of how large amounts of data and cheap computing power are improving forecasting and decision making in social science, government and business.  I enjoyed the book.  Chapter 7, however, was a real highlight.

Ayres argues that large experimental studies have shown that the teaching method which works best is Direct Instruction (here and here are two non-academic discussions which summarizes much of the same academic evidence discussed in Ayres).  In Direct Instruction the teacher follows a script, a carefully designed and evaluated script.  As Ayres notes this is key:

DI is scalable.  Its success isn’t contingent on the personality of some uber-teacher….You don’t need to be a genius to be an effective DI teacher.  DI can be implemented in dozens upon dozens of classrooms with just ordinary teachers.  You just need to be able to follow the script.

Contrary to what you might think, the data also show that DI does not impede creativity or self-esteem.  The education establishment, however, hates DI because it is a threat to the power and prestige of teaching, they prefer the model of teacher as hero.  As Ayres says "The education establishment is wedded to its pet theories regardless of what the evidence says."  As a result they have fought it tooth and nail so that "Direct Instruction, the oldest and most validated program, has captured only a little more than 1 percent of the grade-school market." 



And this about the parents of rich children screwing things up:

Things might have stumbled along in much the same way, except that education departments around the country had begun to earn the ire of a particularly determined group: the parents of dyslexic children. People with dyslexia take much longer to sort out the connection between sound and symbol. The immersion method of teaching was simply not going to work for them. Pressure from these parents, plus some crusading journalism, a steady stream of research, impressive results from several school districts, and heightened concern about pandemic learning loss, have finally turned the tide back toward a stronger emphasis on phonics.

Dyslexia is not linked to intelligence; it has been described as an island of weakness surrounded by a sea of strength. It has no cure but can be overcome. So when some wealthy, well-educated parents found their otherwise typical children were not learning to read, they had questions for the school. These were met in many cases with the advice to read to them more. The parents then did what educated, wealthy people do when they feel slighted: they looked at the research, paid for expensive testing, called their representatives, and contacted their friends in the press.



[christopher thinking]
This "rich parents screwing things up" is an analogy for life. 
We often know the answer, but a group of dogmatics are screwing things up.


#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen
#learning
#instructional-methods
#instruction
#academia
#teaching




















# lessons from the profit/management book

The correct metaphor for competition isn’t a boxing match that knocks out the inefficient firm. The correct metaphor is a slow tide. Inefficient firms must scramble for a bit of high ground but as the tide ebbs and flows they can occasionally catch a breath when their head bobs above the profit line. An inefficient firm can survive for years before it inevitably sinks.

The second lesson from The Profit is that management matters and it matters in systematic and fairly easy to replicate ways. If mis-measurement explained productivity differences, Lemonis would not be able to successfully turn firms around. But he can and does. How?

One of the first things Lemonis does in almost every episode is get the numbers right so he can calculate which products are selling and which have the highest price-to-cost margin. Concentrate production on high-margin, big sellers. Drop the rest. Simple; but many firms don’t know their numbers.

Can it be so simple? To be sure, Lemonis is a smart guy but very little of what he does takes genius. We know this because we now have robust evidence from India and Mexico that better management increases profits and productivity and that such increases can be sustained over the long run. In the studies from India and Mexico, randomly selected firms were given access to a “management intervention” and their productivity and profits improved and stayed higher for years after the intervention ended.


#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen
#management-matters
#ob
#economics


















# raise others' aspirations. give them advice.


The high-return activity of raising others’ aspirations
by  Tyler Cowen October 21, 2018 at 12:16 am in Education
Yesterday I had lunch with a former Ph.D student of mine, who is now highly successful and tenured at a very good school.  I was reminded that, over twenty years ago, I was Graduate Director of Admissions.  One of my favorite strategies was to take strong candidates who applied for Masters and also offer them Ph.D admissions, suggesting they might to do the latter.  My lunch partner was a beneficiary of this de facto policy.

At least two of our very best students went down this route.  Ex ante, neither realized that it was common simply to apply straight to a Ph.D program, skipping over the Masters.  I believe this is now better known, but the point is this.

At critical moments in time, you can raise the aspirations of other people significantly, especially when they are relatively young, simply by suggesting they do something better or more ambitious than what they might have in mind.  It costs you relatively little to do this, but the benefit to them, and to the broader world, may be enormous.

This is in fact one of the most valuable things you can do with your time and with your life.




And yet, the damage to them could also be enormous given one can't predict how a PhD will turn out - if it didn't work well, the person would've wasted 4-6 years of her/his life. Academia gives a great life to a few hundreds of people and destroys thousands of lives.

#quote
#philosophy
#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen































# gender pay gap is not a function of discrimination

Using data on over one million Uber drivers and millions of trips, Cody Cook, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Hall, John A. List, and Paul Oyer show that female Uber drivers earn 7% less than male drivers. What makes this paper new, however, is that UBER’s extensive data lets the authors understand in great detail why the pay gap exists. It’s not discrimination:

Uber uses a gender-blind algorithm and drivers earn according to a transparent formula based on the time and distance of trips. There are no negotiated pay rates or convex returns to long hours worked, factors that have been shown to open a gender earnings gap in other settings. Our research also finds that both average rider ratings of drivers and cancellation rates are roughly equivalent between genders and we find no evidence that outright discrimination, either by the app or by riders, is driving the gender earnings gap.

The authors find that three factors explain the gap; driving speed, experience, and choices about where to drive.

First, driving speed alone can explain nearly half of the gender pay gap. Second, over a third of the gap
can be explained by returns to experience, a factor which is often almost impossible to evaluate
in other contexts that lack high frequency data on pay, labor supply, and output. The remaining
∼20% of the gender pay gap can be explained by choices over where to drive.

Male Uber drivers, like other males, drive a bit faster than female drivers, about 2.2% faster after controlling for experience and location. Since Uber pays by time as well as by distance the returns to speed are not very high and the difference in speed is small but overall this results in an increase in pay for males of about 50 cents an hour.

Drivers learn by doing and more men than women have driven for Uber for years:

A driver with more than 2,500 lifetime trips completed earns 14% more per hour than a driver who
has completed fewer than 100 trips in her time on the platform, in part because she learn where
to drive, when to drive, and how to strategically cancel and accept trips. Male drivers accumulate
more experience than women by driving more each week and being less likely to stop driving with
Uber.

Overall, female and male Uber drivers behave remarkably similarly but small differences aggregated over large samples produce a small but systematic gender gap in wages of about 7%. The gap, however, is an artifact, a social construct that has no implications for “social justice,” drivers are treated equally.

The author’s conclude:

Overall, our results suggest that, even in the gender-blind, transactional, flexible environment
of the gig economy, gender-based preferences (especially the value of time not spent at paid work
and, for drivers, preferences for driving speed) can open gender earnings gaps. The preference
differences that contribute to pay differences in professional markets for lawyers and MBA’s also
lead to earnings gaps for drivers on Uber, suggesting they are pervasive across the skill distribution
and whether in the traditional or gig workplace.





#gender-pay-gap
#economics
#tyler-cowen
#marginal-revolution
#pay-gap
#anti-woke
#economics




































# loss aversion and credentialism kills innovation

Collective Action Kills Innovation
by  Alex Tabarrok January 4, 2018 at 7:25 am in Current Affairs Economics Law Medicine
Oregon has just passed a law that gives gas stations in rural counties the option of allowing self-pumping (in some rural counties this is allowed only between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.!) As you have probably heard, this incomplete lifting of an absurd restriction has some Oregonians upset and afraid.

“I don’t even know HOW to pump gas and I am 62, native Oregonian . . . I say NO THANKS! I don’t like to smell like gasoline!” one woman wrote.

“No! Disabled, seniors, people with young children in the car need help. Not to mention getting out of your car with transients around and not feeling safe. This is a very bad idea. Grrr,” another woman wrote.

“I’ve lived in this state all my life and I REFUSE to pump my own gas . . . This [is] a service only qualified people should perform. I will literally park at the pump and wait until someone pumps my gas.”

Most of the rest of the America–where people pump their own gas everyday without a second thought–is having a good laugh at Oregon’s expense. But I am not here to laugh because in every state but one where you can pump your own gas you can’t open a barbershop without a license. A license to cut hair! Ridiculous. I hope people in Alabama are laughing at the rest of America. Or how about a license to be a manicurist? Go ahead Connecticut, laugh at the other states while you get your nails done. Buy contact lens without a prescription? You have the right to smirk British Columbia!

All of the Oregonian complaints about non-professionals pumping gas–“only qualified people should perform this service”, “it’s dangerous” and “what about the jobs”–are familiar from every other state, only applied to different services.

Once we got familiar with self-pumping it didn’t seem like a problem, but it’s surprising we ever got self-pumping as it would have been easy to scare people into voting no. After all, the case for trained gas pumpers is far stronger than for licensed barbers. Perhaps we were less risk averse and complacent in the past. I don’t think we could build the Hoover Dam today either.

It’s easier to scare than to inform and we fear losses more than we desire gains so collective decision-making defaults toward stasis.

We have innovations like Uber and Airbnb and many others only because entrepreneurs didn’t have to ask for permission. Had we put these ideas to the vote they would have been defeated. Allow almost anyone with a car to drive customers around town? Stranger danger! Let any house be turned into a hotel? Not in my neighborhood! Once the innovations were brought into existence, the masses saw the benefits but they would not have seen those benefits if the idea had been put to a vote. Demonstration is more powerful than imagination.

More and more, however, the sphere of individual action shrinks and that of collective action grows. Thus, I do not laugh at the Oregonians and their fear of gas pumping freedom. We are all Oregonians in one form or another.



#creativity
#innovation
#tyler-cowen
#marginal-revolution
#economics
#ob



















# regulation only increases the divide between small and large firms (in favor of large firms)

Attack monopoly power with deregulation
by  Tyler Cowen May 19, 2023 at 12:43 am in Law
One recent study shows just how important regulation is in contributing to monopoly. Since 1970, increased regulation can explain 31% to 37% of the subsequent increase in market power.

Upon reflection, it is obvious that larger firms are better able to deal with regulatory burdens. They have more employees, bigger legal departments and are better suited to deal with governments. Startups are generally leaner and more nimble, but these aren’t necessarily advantages in dealing with Washington or state and local agencies. As regulatory costs rise, the comparative advantage shifts to the larger firms — exacerbating market power problems…

According to researcher Shikhar Singla, regulation costs an average of $9,093 per employee for a typical small firm, compared to $5,246 for a large firm. It is no surprise that, according to the data, smaller firms invest relatively less in more highly regulated areas.

Based on a study of regulatory comments, Singla also found that large firms oppose regulation in general, but push for regulation when such rules and laws damage the interests of smaller firms. Singla also finds that regulatory costs have increased significantly since the late 1990s.


Regulators prefer large entities. They make their jobs easier.


christopher note
- large teams are dominating science not because they are better innovators, but because science is now more regulated, which favors large teams



#marginal-revolution
#innovation
#regulation
#tyler-cowen
#economics
#ob
#credentialism











# chat GPT for negotiations


https://twitter.com/Francis_YAO_/status/1659135078222663681


https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.10142.pdf


https://github.com/FranxYao/GPT-Bargaining


#chatgpt
#negotiations






























# elites now look like normal people rather than elites



One of the great disappointments of contemporary life is that in times of hopelessly vast income inequality, society’s arch-capitalists—and many very rich people in general—are boring. The zenith of their boringness? How they dress. Look, for example, at Meta CEO Mark Zuckerburg. Extremely rich guy. If you saw him on the street, walking around in a Patagonia vest and a quarter-zip pullover paired with chinos, you’d easily mistake him for one of your dad’s friends.

Of course, this is only true on the surface. In reality, the ultra-rich have not given up on signaling their wealth; they just do so in more subtle ways.

https://www.drorpoleg.com/the-quiet-luxury-of-language/


#rob-henderson
#status
#luxury-beliefs






















# lee, herzog "explaining real life events"

Study where they code newspaper articles for their attribution style. Compare US to Hong Kong.

#mimic-study
#attributions
#cool-method
#pg-blm
#pg-attributions


























# berstein asq 2012 "the transparency paradox"

You need privacy for people to engage in productive deviance and experimentation.

Sort of like goodhart's law.

Drawing from theory and research on learning and control, I introduce the notion of a transparency paradox, whereby maintaining observability of workers may counterintuitively reduce their perfor- mance by inducing those being observed to conceal their activities through codes and other costly means; conversely, creating zones of privacy may, under certain conditions, increase performance. Empirical evidence from the field shows that even a modest increase in group-level privacy sustainably and significantly improves line performance, while qualitative evidence suggests that privacy is important in supporting productive deviance, localized experimentation, distraction avoidance, and continuous improvement.

#ob
#goodharts-law
#best-paper
#jap
#amj
#asq
#grouped-ideas
#ob-notes
#pg-goodhart





















# put your idea into math


tyler cowen - I want to see your idea or your model in an equation

Tyler Cowen
stop writing verbal theory
show me your mathematical model

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBMgSXY2STk

29:50
I demand a mathematical model

start at 26:14 (I want these people to write mathematical models)



Models of the mind book:

The scientist must see through the messy details of the real world and find the bare-bones structure that underlies it.

Mathematical formulation of a model forces it to be self-consistent, and, althought self-consistency is not necessarily truth, self-inconsistency is certainly falsehood.



#grouped-ideas
#computational-modeling
#represent-your-idea-in-math
#philosophy
#phil-of-science
#mathematical-modeling
#dynamics



























# popularizers are the ones who bring life to a scientific discovery

from "models of the mind" book

Popularisers of science persist in the public mind as memorial stones of human progress long after the waves of oblivion have surged over the originators of the soundest research.


#phil-of-science





























# strong link task and weak link tasks, adn steiner


Strong link versions weak link problems is equivalent to steiner additive vs composition tasks, etc.

https://www.experimental-history.com/p/science-is-a-strong-link-problem

Weak-link problems are problems where the overall quality depends on how good the worst stuff is. You fix weak-link problems by making the weakest links stronger, or by eliminating them entirely.
Food safety, for example, is a weak-link problem. You don’t want to eat anything that will kill you.
A car engine is a weak-link problem: it doesn’t matter how great your spark plugs are if your transmission is busted. Nuclear proliferation is a weak-link problem: it would be great if, say, France locked up their nukes even tighter, but the real danger is some rogue nation blowing up the world. Putting on too-tight pants is a weak-link problem: they’re gonna split at the seams.

Some problems are strong-link problems: overall quality depends on how good the best stuff is, and the bad stuff barely matters. Like music, for instance. You listen to the stuff you like the most and ignore the rest. When your favorite band releases a new album, you go “yippee!” When a band you’ve never heard of and wouldn’t like anyway releases a new album, you go…nothing at all, you don’t even know it’s happened. 

Winning the Olympics is a strong-link problem: all that matters is how good your country’s best athletes are. Friendships are a strong-link problem: you wouldn’t trade your ride-or-dies for better acquaintances. Venture capital is a strong-link problem: it’s fine to invest in a bunch of startups that go bust as long as one of them goes to a billion.

I think there are two reasons why scientists act like science is a weak-link problem.

The first reason is fear. Competition for academic jobs, grants, and space in prestigious journals is more cutthroat than ever. When a single member of a grant panel, hiring committee, or editorial board can tank your career, you better stick to low-risk ideas. That’s fine when we’re trying to keep beetles out of asparagus, but it’s not fine when we’re trying to discover fundamental truths about the world.

Here’s our reward for a generation of weak-link thinking.

The US government spends ~10x more on science today than it did in 1956, adjusted for inflation. We’ve got loads more scientists, and they publish way more papers. And yet science is less disruptive than ever, scientific productivity has been falling for decades, and scientists rate the discoveries of decades ago as worthier than the discoveries of today. (Reminder, if you want to blame this on ideas getting harder to find, I will fight you.)

We should have seen this coming, because the folks doing the strongest-link research have been warning us about it for a long time. One of my favorite genres is “Nobel Prize winner explains how it would be impossible to do their Nobel Prize-winning work today.” For instance, here’s Peter Higgs (Nobel Prize in Physics, 2013):

Today I wouldn’t get an academic job. It’s as simple as that. I don’t think I would be regarded as productive enough.

Sydney Brenner (Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 2002) on Frederick Sanger (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1958 & 1980):

A Fred Sanger would not survive today's world of science. With continuous reporting and appraisals, some committee would note that he published little of import between insulin in 1952 and his first paper on RNA sequencing in 1967 with another long gap until DNA sequencing in 1977. He would be labeled as unproductive, and his modest personal support would be denied. We no longer have a culture that allows individuals to embark on long-term—and what would be considered today extremely risky—projects.



#grouped-ideas




















 
















# Google quest to build perfect teams

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hHIikHJV9fI

keywords

- psych of performance

- teams



#google-teams
#team-performance





















# Coordination in traffic

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iHzzSao6ypE&feature=youtu.be


keywords

- cooperation & coordination

- simulation


#coordination
#traffic

























# Williams & Ceci, 2015 "National hiring experiment..."




Hiring committees prefer women to men in stem. National experiment.

keywords

- gender differences

- wage gap

- hiring preferences

- toxic masculinity



#sjw
#anti-woke
#hiring
#wage-gap
#misogyny















# salary transparency street


Salary transparency street
1: interesting clips everyone can relate to
- clips asking people how much they make
2: once on site, useful information people will want
- salary transparency excel sheet (searchable individual salary data)
- market research guide -- learn how much you should be asking for
3: put useful info behind an email block

= now I have everyone's email (newsletter, update videos, brand merch)




So, the process ...

what can i create that people would want access to?

how can those things be put into little clips for youtube shorts?



scale items (love language / astrology new)
surveys
searchable information on meta analytic results (practical action thresholds.)
courses on data science / R programming / People Analytics / Statistics
the psychology of work slide deck
retirement calculator
what do we have research on vs not?
what do people believe there is research on?
what research would people like to see done?
ideas for graduate student social scientists



see photos within the salary-transparency-street folder


#business-idea
#mimic-business
#best-ideas-list
























# strong concern for female well being, no concern for male suffering


People care much more about "female structural problems" than "male structural problems."
People have more sympathy for female suffering compared to male suffering.
Students favor silencing pro-male content but favor raising pro-female content. 

"concern's about women's wellbeing are so strong that researchers even frame pro-female preferences as biases toward women."
Example 1: in a series of studies led by Lily Jampol, researchers asked participants to evaluate essays and give feedback to the author. Participants who then discovered the essay writer was female were more likely to adjust their performance evaluations upward than participants who were told the essay writer was male. This paper was entitled “The Dark Side of White Lies in the Workplace: Feedback to Women Is Upwardly Distorted,” highlighting the potentially harmful consequences of providing softened or distorted feedback to women.
Example 2: marginal revolution. https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/01/monday-assorted-links-390.html
Are women less interested in open science? Paper finds that women are less likely to adopt open science practices. [from the comments section]: "scholars have also critiqued how the open science movement might create barriers and exacerbate inequalities". Truly a depressing case study in how we must tear down any good thing because people can make a tangential argument about "exacerbating inequalities". And if it were somehow found that women were overrepresented, I suspect the authors would happily emphasize the benefits of the movement, focusing instead on the shortcomings of men that make them less likely to adopt such viewpoints. Given their findings, the only reasonable conclusion is that there are problems with open science. If the findings had been reversed, the only reasonable conclusion is that there are problems with men.

[Christopher Summary]
People care much more about female problems than male problems. 
If anything favors women, the problem is with the structure of the thing (or it is good that women are favored).  
If anything favors men, the problem is with men. 
Everyone wants to make tangential arguments about inequalities. 


#group-ideas
#concern-for-womens-wellbeing















# The Victor
C.W. Longenecker

"If you think you are beaten, you are.
If you think you dare not, you don't.
If you like to win but think you can't,
It's almost a cinch you won't.
If you think you'll lose, you're lost.
For out in the world we find
Success begins with a fellow's will.
It's all in the state of the mind.
If you are outclassed, you are.
You've got to think high to rise.
You've got to be sure of yourself before
You can ever win the prize.
Life's battles don't always go
To the stronger or faster man.
But sooner or later, the man who wins
Is the man who thinks he can."

#poem
#quote
#philosophy

























# Lazear 2000 "Performance pay and productivity"

When a firm switches from hourly pay to piece rate pay (pay people for units produced), employee effectinveess (measured in many different ways) increases.


#pay-for-performance
#performance-management
#human-resources












# girl humor

cards against humanity
fake shock for morons (girl humor)

also, girl on hinge: "I want dark bantor. I want humor. I want a guy who is funny."
But they never actually write anything funny.
And when I write something (dark) funny, they react negatively to it.

#girl-humor
#philosophy
#male-female
















# Condly, Clark, and Stolovich (2003)

Incentives improve individual performance on a range of tasks by an average of 22 percent
- team incentives lead to much better performance than individual incentives




keywords
- psych of performance
- motivation
- incentives



#incentives
#motivation
#performance-management

























# Fryer et al., 2018 “Enhancing the efficacy of teacher incentives…”

Incentives for teachers improves their performance.

Good teachers matter. Small improvements in teacher quality result in huge gains for students. How do you ensure great teachers?
- hire better teachers. Hard to do ex ante
- train teachers to be effective. Little evidence that this works.
- tie teacher incentives to the achievement of their students. BOOM.

Experiment in 2010-2011 in Chicago. One set of teachers – whom we label the “Gain” treatment – received “traditional” financial incentives in the form of bonuses at the end of the year linked to student achievement. Other teachers – the “Loss” treatment – were given a lump sum payment at the beginning of the school year and informed that they would have to return some or all of it if their students did not meet performance targets.

All incentives led to better test scores, but loss-framed incentives had larger effects. The effects went away in year 2.

other literature

- in vaccination research, there is no difference between gain and loss framing for getting parents to vaccinate (O'Keefe & Nan, 2012)

- gain framing leads to positive emotions, loss framing to negative emotions, which mediate choices...but both produce action (Nabi et al., 2020, communications research)

- bonuses framed as losses improve productivity of teams in a Chinese factory (Hossain and List 2009).5  

keywords
- psych of performance
- incentives
- motivation
- gain loss framing



#school
#economics
#incentives
#motivation
#gain-loss-framing





















# Fryer, 2017 “Management and student achievement…”

Does training management training for principals increase school productivity?

What the management training consisted of:

(a) instructional planning

Spend an entire summer teaching principals about backwards planning (what do you want the students to know? Plan your day from that. Rather than “activity planning,” where you start with an activity and only after think about what the kids should know.”)

During the school year, teachers submit lesson plans to principals, and the principals offer feedback about whether they met the backward plan idea.

(b) Data driven instruction

Test the students every 6 weeks. Teacher and principal meet to discuss any changes to lessons that need to be made based on the trend in the data.

(c) Observation and feedback

Principal observes every teacher for at least 15 minutes once every other week. Principals then meet with the teachers about it.

Principals were trained on what to look for.




Results
- treatment schools had better test scores at year 1
- no differences in test scores at year 2
- no differences in year 2 because of principal turnover



#school
#economics
#incentives








# within unit logic from dalal


It is, however, important to note that within-person theorizing is frequently richer than between-person theorizing even when empirical results do not differ across levels of analysis. Indeed, many, perhaps even most, research questions in psychology and micro-organizational behavior are in reality within-person questions (Curran & Bauer, 2011; see also Beckmann et al., 2010). Yet, these questions are all-too-frequently tested at the between-person level—and these between-person tests exert a stultifying effect on theory. For example, research questions pertaining to organizational justice are more appropriately posed at a within-person level, in the form of cognitive, affective, and ultimately, behavioral responses to discrete events experienced by a given person over time. Such a perspective would view injustice through the lens of an appraisal of the event, thereby requiring theoretical explanations regarding the conditions under which a person is more likely to view an event as unjust (see Rupp, Bashshur, & Liao, 2007). Such a perspective would also provide a central role to affect and how it fluctuates within a person over time in response to events appraised as just or unjust—something that has been repeatedly advocated but that is nonetheless typically omitted from between person theories of justice (e.g., Dalal & Hulin, 2008). Similarly, another widely debated research question—the relationship between organizational citizenship behavior and counterproductive work behavior—has typically been studied at the between-person level of analysis even though at heart, it is a within-person question; namely, is “a given person . . . capable of engaging in both [citizenship] and [counterproductive behavior] simultaneously or even within a very small time interval?” (Dalal, 2005: 1251). Although subsequent experience sampling research has confirmed that the relationship between these two types of behavior is similar at both levels of analysis, this research has also demonstrated the need to augment the between-person nomological network with more proximal within-person predictors (Dalal et al., 2009). Thus, differences in relationships across levels of analysis can provide the impetus for theory generation and refinement—but so can similarities (Chen, Bliese, & Mathieu, 2005). Within-person thinking is as important for scientific progress in the case of similarities across levels as it is in the case of differences. 

Collecting repeated rather than single (cross-sectional) observations allows us to move beyond between-unit associations and examine within-unit associations, an inferential frame that better aligns with the logic in management theory. As stated in Dalal (OCB paper), most management theories articulate relationships at the within-unit level -- as continuous streams of events and experiences that people, teams, and organizations navigate over time -- even if their authors do so unknowingly or implicitly. Examples exist in many literatures, including appraisal theory, organizational justice theory, and theory on emotional display rules. Most appraisal theories generally posit the existence of event-appraisal-affect chains (Weiss & Cropanzano, 1996) in which an event is followed by an appraisal of its positivity-negativity (primary appraisal) and the context in which it occurs (secondary appraisal). Then, both appraisals influence a given employee's affect. Similarly, organizational justice theories often pose within-person level logic, taking the form of cognitive, affective, and ultimately, behavioral responses to discrete events experienced by a given person over time. The same is true for emotional labor (Glomb & Tews, 2004; GRANDEY): when faced with unfamiliar or stressful situations, an individual will pause to consider the most appropriate emotional display for the moment, implicitly contemplating what is commonly expected of individuals in similar environments; then, the individual chooses to surface or deep act, surface acting wherein he/she fakes the expected emotional expression and deep acting wherein he/she consciously cultuvates the emotion required for the situation and outwardly expresses it; then, the individual experiences cognitive, emotional, and behavioral responses. This chain-of-events logic is fundamentally within-person. None of the aforementioned ideas is adequately examined by using cross-sectional designs (unless one is willing to make very strong assumptions) that regress predictors responsible for the between-person patterns of covariation found in observed responses. Although teams theory has long articulated within-unit logic, meeting this logic with the appropriate inferential frame in empirical designs is a recent phenomenon. The model we depicted in this study sits at the within-unit level of analysis, and our data collection and analysis efforts were consistent with this frame of reference. 


#within-between
#theories-are-within-unit
#within-unit-logic
#why-within-reasoning-is-consistent-with-theory












# never forget biden politics, like covid

Biden cliche bad leftist policy
- race signaling. we hired the first trans whatever
- if you don't vote for me you ain't black
- russian ukraine war (handled poorly and printed money)
- bailed out svb banks
- printed money
- happy meal fallacy with airlines (mandatory meals, hotels, taxis for canceled flights)

#never-forget
#politics
#biden







# wozniak be a loner:

Most inventors and engineers I've met are like me -- they're shy and they live in their heads. They're almost like artists. In fact, the very best of them are artists. And artists work best alone where they can control an invention's design without a lot of other people designing it for marketing or some other committee. I don't believe anything really revolutionary has been invented by committee. If you're that rare engineer who's an inventor and also an artist, I'm going to give you some advice that might be hard to take. That advice is: Work Alone. You're going to best be able to design revolutionary products and features if you're working on your own. Not on a committee. Not on a team. 

#quote
#philosophy




























# Fryer et al. 2016 “Vertical versus horizontal incentives…”

Given incentives to students and they perform better.

In DC, student incentives were “horizontal” — provided to one agent (student) on various inputs (attendance, behavior, homework, uniforms).

In Houston, incentives were “vertical” — provided to multiple agents (parents, teachers, and students) for a single input (math scores).

Results
- horizontal incentives led to increases in math and reading test scores
- vertical incentives improved math scores but at the cost of reading scores

Students view different subjects as substitutes. Providing incentives, therefore, for multiple inputs in the educational production function is crucial for increasing student achievemnet.

RESEARCH IDEA
- he says students view subjects as substitutes
- that is an inference
- he did not measure their psychological perceptions
- someone could

keywords
- psych of performance
- incentives
- student achievement
- motivation



#school
#economics
#incentives






















# Fryer, 2018 “Reconciling results on racial differences … “

Although black men make up only 6 percent of the US population, they account for 40 percent of the unarmed men shot to death by police this year.” The Guardian begins their article remarking, “Young black men were nine times more likely than other Americans to be killed by police offi- cers in 2015,” and VICE exclaims, “Black peo- ple were shot more often and at higher rates than people of any other races.” Ross (2015) con- cludes, “There is evidence of significant bias in the killing of unarmed black Americans relative to unarmed white Americans.”

Yet, these descriptive statistics, while poignant, do not prove racial bias. Indeed, when I compare the different datasets described above using a common estimating equation I conclude that the “evidence for bias” in some studies and not others is mainly a result of misspecified regression equations, not inherent differences in the datasets.

I find, after controlling for suspect demographics, officer demograph- ics, encounter characteristics, suspect weapon, and year fixed effects, that blacks are 27.4 per- cent less likely to be shot at by police relative to non-black, non-Hispanics.


keywords
- racial bias
- police shooting
- rate of encounter


#economics
#police-shooting

















# Fryer 2016 “The production of human capital in developed …”

What can be done to increase student achievement in schools? How can we ensure that even the least advantaged kids can acquire productive skills?
- small classrooms (Kruger 1999 randomized controlled study)
- high dosage tutoring of adolescents
- lots of tables, not a lot to take away from it



#school
#economics

























# Dobbie & Fryer, 2013 “The impact of attending a school with high-achieving peers…”

Should you go to a super high-scoring high school to be around really smart peers?

Take students who barely make it into the smart high schools (the cut score is 91, and these students scored a 91.5). These students went to the super high achievmeent HS, where they were around peers who were ~0.20 standard deviations smarter than they were.

Now take students who were roughly as smart but didn’t go to the smart HS (students who scored 90.5). These students went to more heterogeneous HS’s, and if anything tended to be smarter than their peers.

The first group, when tracked at college, was no more likely to finish college, have a better job, or have better grades in college.

Research methods note
- lots of “proxies” going on
- no measures of peer interaction, or satisfaction

keywords
- big fish small pond
- motivation
- psych of performance
- motivation

- relative to peers


#economics
#school
#frog-pond
#small-fish-big-fish



















# Rigotti et al. 2014 “Gains and losses …”

People undergoing upward career transitions. They experience both increased strain and higher satisfaction.
- more strain due to elevated time pressure and greater work-home interference
- more satisfaction due to better person-job fit (not due to autonomy).

keywords
- well being
- satisfaction
- careers

- relative to peers


#careers
#well-being




















# Dobbie & Fryer, 2012 “Getting beneath the veil …”

What makes a school effective? What are some predictors of effective schools?

Traditional IV’s don’t actually matter: class size, per pupil expenditure, fraction of teachers with certification, fraction of teachers with advanced degree

Five IV’s account for 45% of variance in school effectiveness: frequent teacher feedback, use of data to guide instruction, high-dosage tutoring, increased instruction time, and high expectations

Cool intro:
- effective education matters. Two approaches to improving education:
- (a) allow free market to drive out ineffective schools
- (b) manipulate current education programs
- evidence for (a) is mixed: school choice has a modest effect
- evidence for (b) is low
++ but it’s low because people in the past focused on class size, per pupil expenditure, or fraction of teachers with advanced degree
++ those are not good measures of effectiveness
++ they propose a new set of “effectiveness” measures, which account for more variance when manipulated




keywords
- measurement of effectiveness
- granularity of DV
- school achievement
- psych of performance



#school
#economics
#incentives



















# Cicala, Fryer, & Spenkuch, 2017 “Self-selection and comparative advantage…”

Relative aspects of your peers has a strong influence on your behavior.

When you decline in rank, you are more likely to act out if the environment is amenable to acting out, or to act up if the environment is amenable to acting up.

In an archival data set of NY middle school students
- students experiencing a 50% decline in rank were much more likely to have a behavioral incident than those experiencing a 50% improvement in rank
- rank with respect to test or achievement scores

Experiment:

Solve some mazes on a computer (paid for performance)
Computer then shows ordinal and cardinal performance rankings of all children
Control participants:
- you can pay a cost to practice mazes that might appear on the final trial
Treatment participants:
- you can pay a cost to practice
- you can pay a cost to “slime” your peers so that they cannot practice
Final stage: complete mazes and get money for doing so

Results:

Among the control group, willingness to pay for practice is negatively correlated with ordinal rank. So, students at the bottom are willing to pay to try to practice and get better.

Among the treatment group, ordinal rank negatively correlated with spending money to slime others.

The opportunity to engage in a second, disruptive activity caused lower-ranked students to substitute away from practicing. Instead, they paid to engage in socially wasteful behavior.


Other literature on “relative to peers” effects:

Emerging literature on relative effects: Luttmer (2005) and Card et al. (2012), demonstrate that own well-being and satisfaction depend negatively on the earnings of neighbors and coworkers. Kuziemko et al. (2014) provide experimental evidence to suggest that people are “last-place averse.”


keywords
- psych of performance
- motivation
- relative standing of peers


#school
#economics
#frog-pond
#motivation



























# Yuan, Park, & Sliter, 2018 “Put you down versus tune you out…”

Negative emails can reduce well-being in the workplace.

- negative emails can be active ("you suck") or passive (nobody responded to my email)

Email incivility example 1 (actual email the participant received): “I have been
very busy putting things together for this project, a lot more than you recently, so be
ready to hit it hard this week to catch up on things.”

Email incivility example 2 (actual email the participant received; the email sender
had to complete a required training module): “Is this a joke??? Are you kidding me? …
Complete waste of time, resources and money.”

Passive email incivility example 1 (description by the participant): “I didn’t get an email [after asking to reschedule a meeting]—it was the lack of response that I consider
rude. … It has now been 8 days, no response (and the time for having the
meeting/discussing the decision is over).”

Passive email incivility example 2 (description by the participant): “In response to my
request to acknowledge an important piece of information, the person would reply: ‘I got
it! What else do you need from me?!’ and so forth. Other inquiries would result in no
response or extremely concise responses that wouldn’t answer a specific question.”

keywords
- well being
- emails
- ohp


#well-being
#ohp
#emails
















# stoicism quotes


Do not fear having no friends. Fear having bad friends.

If you like being alone, it is a sign that you have inner strength and independent thinking. A man who likes being alone has more ability to appreciate moments of solitude and to enjoy the simplicity of life. 

Boastful speeches are the first sign of weakness. Those who are capable of great things keep their mouths shut. Cicero.

We suffer more from imagination than reality. Seneca.

The first rule is to keep an untroubled spirit. The second is to look things in the face and know them for what they are. Marcus Aurelius.

The object of life is not to be on the side of the majority, but to escape finding oneself in the ranks of the insane. Marcus Aurelius.

To bear trials with a calm mind robs misfortune of its strength and burden. Seneca. 

Why would you feel anger at a world that does not notice? MA

A rule for when anything tempts you to feel bitter: Not "this is misfortune" but "to bear this worthily is good fortune." MA

Do not crave what you do not have. Instead, consider what you have, and how you would crave for them if they were not yours. MA

#quotes
#philosophy
#stoic
#stoicism



















# flirt post thinking

The style of speech, not just content. 

Fascinating. I never thought I would be treated to a 15 minute monologue on...

Forbes tavern... so strange how your tone and face are so friendly but the content is ... 


#flirt-opener
#social-animal
#flirt-reflection





























# Park & Haun, 2017

Employees with greater incivility via email during week t showed greater work withdrawal during week t + 1.

“Futhermore, employees transmit their stress to their domestic partner on the weekend, and, as a result, the partner also withdraws from work the next week.”

RESEARCH IDEA

- this is a negative spiral. Impossible. If I pulled the 10 most recent articles in JAP, would they all have downward or upward spirals? Could write a paper on the need for systems flows that bring patterns back to baseline.

- another upward spiral in Wu, Griffin, & Parker, 2015 "Developing agency." Autonomy (or skill utilization) positively increases internal locus of control, which positively increases autonomy.

- another spiral in Gao-Urhahn, Biemann, and Jaros, 2016. Affective organizational commitment and income.

- another in Halbesleben and Wheeler, 2012: ocbs and social support

- identify all of these in the literature. Comp model the spirals using their coefficients. What are the boundary conditions that level these things out?

keywords
- well being
— emails
- ohp
- perhaps a false between vs within inference mistake

- upward spirals



#well-being
#ohp
#upward-spirals

































# Hardin et al., 2020 "Show me the ...family"

Having photos of close others in sight decreases the hegemony of an economic schema in people’s minds, which in turn decreases their propensity to commit unethical behavior. Supporting our theory, a field survey and three experiments find a negative relationship between displaying photos of close others at work and financial transgressions.




Good example of research that doesn't feel fundamental.




keywords

- unethical behavior

- scientific reading

- undergraduate reading




#not-fundamental-research
#ungrad-reading
#photos-on-desk
































# marry and average wife

If you want to be happy for the rest of your life
Never make a pretty woman your wife
So for my personal point of view
Get an ugly girl to marry you....

A pretty woman makes her husband look small
And very often causes his downfall
As soon as he married her and then she starts
To do the things that will break his heart

But if you make an ugly woman your wife
Ah you'll be happy for the rest of your life
An ugly woman cooks meals on time
She'll always give you peace of mind....

Don't let your friends say you have no taste
Go ahead and marry anyway
Though her face is ugly, her eyes don't match
Take it from me, she's a better catch....

Say man! Hey baby!
I saw your wife the other day!
Yeah? Yeah, an' she's ugly!
Yeah, she's ugly, but she sure can cook, baby!
Yeah, alright!

#poem
#quote









# Leveling the playing field by hurting the talented. Kurt Vennegut


As an average looking person I think this is massively unfair. I call upon the federal government to level the playing field by making beautiful people look average. This can be done with fat suits, mandatory masks, plastic surgery, etc. Read Kurt Vonnegut’s prophetic short story, “Harrison Bergeron” for a fuller description.

#poem
#quote
#philosophy






































# Gardner & Ryan, 2020 “What’s in it for you? Demographics and self-interest”

When employees hark for diversity, majority group members (white males) are displeased. When the employee who harks for diversity, however, is a white male, then displeasure is mitigated. Why are minorities and women viewed as less effective when promoting diversity?

Promoter demographics are related to perceptions of promoter self-interest, such that those advocating for a cause related to their demographics will be rated as more self-interested than those advocating for a cause unrelated to their demographics.

When promoters are viewed as self-interested, then recipients are displeased.

Method
- white males read plans to enact diversity training, targeted recruitment strategies, and mentoring programs
- plan comes from white male, white female, black male, black female
- white males rate how self-interested they find the promoter
- white males rate their support for the proposed initiative

White males find promoters self-interested (when matched) and therefore offer lower support.

Take away
- those promoting diversity efforts related to their own group membership would be perceived as more self-interested than those promoting diversity unrelated to their personal characteristics


#diversity
#sjw



















# matthew crawford

Tokville when he went around America was very impressed with people when he made the observation that, "it is in these every activities, practical activities requiring cooperation among the American people (farmer's markets, coordinated driving with no street signs, helping neighbors with housing stuff) that the Democtratic character is formed -- the ability to work things out among ourselves."


#philosophy
#quote
#cooperation
#coordination
#crawford















# matthew crawford

Safetyism feedback loop: the safer we become, the more intolerable any remaining risk appears. This dynamic turns into a whole bunch of useless "helping" professions who are necessarily trying to think of us as fragile and in need of help. 


#philosophy
#quote
#crawford













# matthew crawford

Academic thought has gotten quite constricted. There are a couple of problems. One is a professionalization, which is inherently policing the boundaries of the discipline. The other is the politicization -- everything you write has to support the political regime, broadly understood.  


#philosophy
#quote
#crawford






















# matthew crawford

Tech guys are horrified by human heuritics and intuition that facilitate coordination (because it looks messy and illogical). 

Experimental self driving car by Google came to intersection. It came to a full stop and waited for the other cars to do the same before proceeding. It was following the rules.

But of course that isn't what people do. People roll up to the intersection, see what other people do. Roll through the stop sign. Ambiguous cases of right of way. We make eye contact, give a little nod, maybe waive the person across. The Google car got paralyzed and melted down.

The guy in charge of the experiment said what he had learned from the experiment was that "human beings need to be less idiotic." Now of course what he meant by that was that we need to behave more like robots, to be rule followers. Completely invisible to him was this distinctly human form of intelligence -- this thought among elites in our country is politically significant. Why? Because of Tokeville story: Tokville when he went around America was very impressed with people when he made the observation that, "it is in these every activities, practical activities requiring cooperation among the American people (farmer's markets, coordinated driving with no street signs, helping neighbors with housing stuff) that the Democtratic character is formed -- the ability to work things out among ourselves."

Coordinating driving among humans. Our capacity to mutually predict one another's behavior. It is an evolved capacity of our brain that is scaffolded by social norms. Go to an intersection in Rome or Bombay...you will see unregulated intersections (no lines, no lights). You have buses and donkeys and cars and bycicles all finding their way through. It is beautiful to behold. You are witnessing the human capacity for improvisational cooperation. But when one of these tech guys looks at that, he's horrified because it looks chaotic and messy. 


#philosophy
#quote
#cooperation
#coordination
#crawford








































# Traylor et al. “Helping healthcare teams save lives…”

A review of teamwork relevant to healthcare workers during covid

Input => Mediators => Output

Input
- job demands / home demands
- team context (e.g., uncertainty)
- team structure (composition / interdependence)

Moderated by countermeasures

Mediators
- Team processes
- Emergent states (collective efficacy, task vigilance, psych safety, trust, shared mental models, conflict)

Outputs
- performance
- safety
- treatment efficacy

Possible countermeasures
- preparing to perform (clarity roles, prebriefs) => build shared mental models
- ensure team members know who possess deep expertise => transactive memory
- offer support when team members are drained => task vigilance & trust
- respond to q’s, ensure members speak up and ask q’s => psychological safety
- when disagreements emerge, focus on what is right not who is right => team conflict
- debrief => psych safety, collective efficacy
- regularly check in with coworkers => task vigilance




#teams
#ipo-model
#box-and-arrow
























# Diwas et al “Task selection and workload …”

People have a task completion bias when workload increases: they choose to complete easier tasks (i.e., tasks that can be completed in a short amount of time with little cognitive effort).
- doing so improves performance in the short run at the cost of performance in the long run

In both the field and the lab, when the level of workload increases, workers select easier tasks over difficult tasks.
- people do so because it gives them a sense of progress
- people do so because it makes them feel good to complete a task (high workload is anxiety provoking…selecting an easy task is a way to reduce anxiety)


Field
- Emergency department in a hospital
- workload per doctor is indicated by number of patients
- patients are “easy” or “hard” based on symptoms
- they find that doctors select more easy patients when there are more patients around


Lab
- completed three different tasks
++ easy (number recognition)
++ medium (typing)
++ hard (math)
- Now imagine that you are very busy (or not)
- Choose one of the tasks to complete
- which task do participants choose?
- If told to imagine being busy, they are more likely to select the easy task


Lab2
- under time pressure, type copy a page of text from book where the text is vertical
- high workload = listen to song while typing and count how many times 5 words occur
- report feelings of progress
- report good felings about task completion
- read a description of what you might do next, A or B
- A “most people find this version of the task challenging”
- B “most people find this version of the task easy”
- choose A or B
- regardless of choice, all participants complete an anagram task
- people in the high workload condition chose the easier version





Other, cool effects regarding “workload”
- goal gradients: individuals show higher motivation when goal completion draws near
- completing work makes people feel good




POTENTIAL NEXT RESEARCH
- the “high workload” tasks were different from the “now choose a task” tasks
- in their theory, they make it seem as though people, when under duresss, switch to easier tasks…or choose an easier way to do things
- but their lab studies were sequential. The “easy” vs “hard” choice was regarding a task that was different from the task creating high workload.





keywords
- motivation
- self regulation
- psych of performance
- workload
- task selection




#operations-management
#workload
#motivation
#self-regulation


























# Rom et al., 2020 “On trading off labor and leisure…”

Activities that are low in autonomy lead to perceptions of opportunity costs (pissed because you are missing out on desirable alternatives), which then leads to task disengagement.

experiment
- you are going to view circles filled with various shades of color
- your task will be to determine if the color is more green than it is blue, or vice versa
- at any time you can drop out to move to the next task
- Next task A: watch mundane videos about washing dishes
- Next task B: watch exciting and funny videos
- People are quicker and more likely to drop out when told about task B
++ especially when discerning color was difficult




keywords
- motivation
- task selection
- psych of performance


#motivation
#task-selection
#autonomy



















# schmidt principles of org behavior intelligence

Intelligence is
- the ability to learn
- the ability to consider and manipulate abstract concepts
- best predictor of job performance we know of

What is the mediator?
- job knowledge. Intelligence -> know what to do and how to do it -> perform


#intelligence
#ob
#principles-of-ob-handbook










# barrick principles of org behavior conscientiousness and emotional stability

Other than intelligence, best personality predictors of job performance include
- emotional stability (calm, steady, secure)
- conscientiousness (dependable, efficient, meticulous)


#personality
#principles-of-ob-handbook














# judge principles of org behavior job satisfaction

Job satisfaction - "pleasant state resulting from appraisal of job" (Locke, 1976, p. 1304)

Predicts
- job performance
- withdrawal
- life satisfaction

Best predictor of job satisfaction is JCM 
- identity: see work from beginning to end
- significance: one's work is important
- skill variety
- autonomy
- feedback


They call JCM "mentally challenging"

Job satisfaction matters. Employees who are satisfied with their jobs tend to perform better, withdraw less, and lead happier and healthier lives. Organizations whose employees are satisfied with their jobs are more likely to be productive and profit­ able. The single most effective way organizations can achieve a satisfied workforce is to provide their employees with mentally challenging work.

#principles-of-ob-handbook
























# Feynman the original scientists did not have peer review

https://freaktakes.substack.com/p/feynman-on-journal-reviews-conferences


See, at the time, the journals (and the scientists) were under no allusions that it was the journals’ job to be the arbiters of correct and incorrect, the gatekeepers of what was scientific and unscientific. The point of the journals was to be the bulletin board of new science from around the world; they were a way to re-create the culture and knowledge-sharing of a departmental colloquium with scientists from around the world. Getting your paper in the Physical Review was nice because a lot of people read it, but I’ve never seen an account of a top scientist bragging that they got a paper in the Physical Review as an accomplishment in and of itself 


#philosophy-of-science
#history-of-science
#publish-or-perish















# Eberly, Lee, & Mitchell, principles of OB turnover

a) First approach to understanding turnover

low job attitudes (satisfaction) lead people to consider thoughts, feelings, and expected positive outcomes of quitting

evaluate alternatives

when someone finds a better job, they quit

evidence: large correlations between dissatisfaction and org commitment, turnover intentions, search intentions, and actual quitting

b) Second approach to understanding turnover (unfolding model)


Path 1: shock triggers pre-existing action plan, leave without deliberation (job satisfaction irrelevant)

In path 1, a shock triggers a person to use a pre-existing action plan (or what social psychologists call a script). Minimal mental deliberations occur. A person leaves without considering his or her current attachment to the organization (e.g. organizational commitment) and without considering his or her current job alternatives. Unlike traditional ideas and path 4, job satisfaction is essentially irrelevant. In path 1, a satisfied person can appear to leave abruptly but is in fact following a pre-planned course of action. For example, an interviewee reported the following: “It was very simple; I am going to graduate school . . . It had noth­ ing to do with my job. It had everything to do with my personal situation . . . Very quickly, as soon as I got the letter that I was accepted into graduate school, the decision was made” (Lee, Mitchell, Wise, and Fireman, 1996, p. 17). Note that path 1 involves a shock (e.g. the acceptance letter), script (e.g. return to graduate school), no job search, and no evaluation of alternatives.


Path 2: shock triggers violation of one's attachment to org, leave without deliberation (job satisfaction irrelevant)

In path 2, a shock prompts a person to reconsider his or her basic attachment to the organization because of violations to one’s basic values, personal or professional goals, and/or plans for goal attainment (“images”). I was working and minding my own business. Then, a new person was hired and she was pretty vocal. One day she was complaining about her pay. While that made me mad, what was worse is that I had been at the bank for over a year and she was making a dol­ lar an hour more than me while doing the same job. I quit the next day. Note that path 2 involves a shock (e.g. learning about the pay of a fellow employee), no script, violations (e.g. images of personal and professional goal attainment), no job search, and no evaluation of alternatives.

Path 3: shock and then evaluations of alternatives

or the last ten years, Mr. Lew supervised a group of twelve engineers. When asked why he left his former company to become a real estate developer, Mr. Lew said that . . . it was the departure from the firm of another work group member. That departure left Mr. Lew as the work group’s oldest and clearly most out-of-date engineer. [He realized that] he had minimal advancement prospects and that “it was time to move on.” As such, he evaluated his interests, aspirations, and available opportunities. Although he had no particular connection to his new profession, real estate development appeared, on balance, his best choice. He quit the defense company upon finding an acceptable job in real estate. (Lee and Maurer, 1997, p. 249). Note that path 3 involves a shock (e.g. co-worker’s quitting), no script, violations (e.g. images of professional goal attainment), job search (e.g. finding real-estate work), and evaluation of alternatives (e.g. in comparison to his interests, aspirations, and available alternatives).


[christopher note]
I disagree that paths 1 and 2 do not involve job dissatisfaction. They do involve dissatisfaction, it is just a snapshot of extreme dissatisfaction rather than a prolonged, moderated amount.

Path 4: same as approach 1: people are dissatisfied over time, consider alternatives, then leave


c) Third approach: focus on what makes employees stay rather than what makes them leave

Job Embeddedness Model. People stay as a function of three things

Sacrifice (losses employee will experience if they quit, like benefits)

Fit: congruence of individual values with org culture

Links: friends at the workplace

On the job and off the job sacrifice, fit, and links matter a lot. 



#principles-of-ob-handbook

















# good contrast of type of writing I like

Compare "reclaiming conversation" with edwin locke's chapter on emotions in principles of OB handbook. The first is a bunch of data, a bunch of evidence, and someone trying to make sense of all that data and evidence. The second, Locke, is pontification with no evidence. Odd when the handbook is called evidence-based. 










# Latham goal setting principles of OB handbook

You need to address these questions for motivation:

1. Demands
(a) Do people have specific high goals?
(b) Are the tasks “drudgery” or growth facilitating?
(c) Do people have the confidence so that they can attain the goals set (self-efficacy)?

2. Moderators
(a) Have people been trained adequately? Do they have the ability to perform the
tasks required of them?
(b) Are they committed to goal attainment?
(c) Do they receive feedback on goal progress?
(d) Do they have the resources to attain the goal or are there situational constraints?

3. Rewards
(a) Are they rewarded for their accomplishments?
(i) Intrinsically?
(ii) Extrinsically?
(b) Are they satisfied with their rewards?

4. Attitudes
(a) Are they committed to their organization’s effectiveness? (b) Are they willing to accept future challenges?


#principles-of-ob-handbook









# durham pay for performance principles of ob handbook

Our principle is pay for performance. This principle involves providing monetary rewards through carefully designed compensation systems that base pay on measured performance within the control of participants. It also includes incorporating appropriate concerns for procedural and distributive justice. In most situations, properly designed pay-for-performance systems will lead to better performance results.

Well - designed pay - for- perfor mance systems make major contributions to perfor mance through two main mechanisms. First, they positively influence the motivation to perform. Second, they impact the attraction and retention patterns of organizations (i.e., who joins and who remains), thereby affecting the caliber of individuals available to perform.

A number of different pay delivery plans qualify as pay-for-performance systems, although they vary widely with respect to how closely they tie pay to performance. Pay-for­ performance systems can deliver monetary rewards at the individual, small group, and/or division or organizational level. Evidence suggests that pay for performance at each of these levels can positively impact performance.



come back to this.



#principles-of-ob-handbook













# possible debates for a class

student debates: what is the best pay system? (see durham chapter in ob principles handbook on pay systems)
student debates: what predictors should you use in your selection system? (general mental ability, or personality?)


#ob-student-debates
#debates
#class-debates















# steven pinker on top down vs bottom up rationality in intellectuals



Intellectuals tend to like top down verbal theories that can be verbally articulated rather than bottom up distributed wisdom of crowds form of rationality, which you sometimes see in the success of markets. Markets -- the whole idea is that no one is in charge. The government does not tell you how many shoes to make. Companies know because they get signals from how many people are trying to buy shoes. Intellectuals tend to hate that because it is so ugly. You are not getting to deduce it from first principles. The rules of a language is another example. Language is not something that ever gets stipulated by a panel of rule givers. What diction editors do is they pay attention to the way millions of people use language and they try to codify it. It's amazing what we end up with. We end up with the English language with all its beauty, precision, poetry. Not from a theory, but because millions of people tried to communicate. So these bottom up aggregation of millions of interactions that results in greater order or greater design or greater intelligence tends to be the kind of thing that does not sit well with the intellectual mind. 


https://www.youtube.com/shorts/la8P6zk8iD4

#anti-woke
#pinker
#bottom-up
#top-down
#wisdom-of-crowds
#phil-of-science
#philosophy











# rory, conrow, bowen making money as a youth

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/xbgKvCYlXXQ

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/spgf6UmhAe0

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/4KOam_84FSI


#nephews
#dishop-boys
#teach-boys















# feminization of organizations

criticising someone in the language of care and concern

Patriarchal or not, societies rely on male-dominated teams to be effective. Feminisation means undermining such teams and replacing them with cliques that enable forms of aggression that target individual connections to others. These include such techniques as weaponised compassion (X doesn’t care enough) or ostentatious propriety (X is not conforming to the right norms).


Imagine having a 6 years longer life expectancy due to less work related stress, making up only 7% of workplace fatalities, 4% deaths due to war, 24% of suicides and homicides, 20% of the homeless, having people assume you are the victim when you initiated DV in the majority of cases, having laws that cannot identify you as a perpetrator of rape, having a 40% higher adoption rate... and thinking men are privileged


#anti-woke
#philosophy
#quote
#feminization-of-orgs













# tim dillon quote

Stop looking for mystical experiences and go to work.

#tim-dillon
#quote

















# in defense of surveys

in defense of surveys (stated preferences are never revealed preferences. butter vs margerine, grey study)
- you could make the same argument for "lab behavior is never real worl behavior." Take economics games with undergraduate students. They don't map onto what you find with experienced workers
- random bias is fine
- error in a given direction hurts the mean score but it does not hurt parameter estimation of a linear model
- psychometrics: artifact partitioning, use multiple people, different rating sources, different surveys, relationships to other things

So, a psychometrician would say, "in the butter example, the problem is not that you are asking people for their preferences, it is that you are using a poor device to measure preferences."

#in-defense-of-surveys
#psychometrics




























# Networks when resources are scarce

When resources are scarce (housing crash, covid), you decrease your contacts but increase frequency of contact with close circle. So your network becomes smaller but more dense. The opposite happens when resources are abundent.

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2018173&HistoricalAwards=false


Rao, Kariyushi. (In Progress). Collective Response to Scarcity: How the Resource Environment Shapes Social Networks.
Description: I explore differences in the structure of social (communication) networks that emerge within experimental groups of human research participants reacting to changes in their resource environment. My goal is to identify the effect of changes in the resource environment on person-level preferences for communication partners. My overarching hypothesis is that when resources become increasingly scarce in the environment, people prefer fewer communication partners, and increase their rate of communication with each partner. Conversely, when resources become increasingly abundant, people prefer more communication partners, and their rate of communication with each partner decreases. At the group-level, social networks will shrink in size and become more densely connected in response to resource scarcity. In response to resource abundance, social networks will expand in size and become more sparsely connected. If my hypothesized results are obtained, the present research will be the first controlled studies to demonstrate that environmental scarcity/abundance causes structure to emerge in social networks.




Rao, Kariyushi. (In Progress).  The Impact of ‘Open’ Workspace on Employees’ Social Networks.
Description: I investigate the effect of an “open” floorplan on employees’ self-reported friendship and advice networks in one regional office of a global manufacturing firm.  Employees are surveyed both before and after moving from an office with a “closed” floorplan with restricted traffic flows and no central social hub to an office with an “open” floorplan with unrestricted traffic flows and a central social hub.  Pre- and post-move network structures are compared across several key variables related to knowledge sharing and productivity.  Employees’ self-reported brokerage behaviors and satisfaction with work relationships are also compared, and the role of these individual differences as moderators of the floorplan effect on social networks is tested.




keywords

- networks

- resources

- environment

- chicago booth


#networks
#marginal-value
#patchy-environments












































# Cohen, 2020 "Housing the homeless..."

Providing housing to homeless reduces crime and improves health.

keywords
- economics
- housing
- homelessness


#inequality
#economics


































# social unity and cohesion predicts performance

https://qz.com/work/1265807/lebron-jamess-twitter-habits-can-teach-us-about-successful-organizations/


Analysis of NBA twitter profiles and team success. The caveliers, who won the year this analysis was conducted, had a dense, cohesive network on twitter: all players followed at least one other player on the team, and lebron james followed 7 other players. The knicks, conversely, did not win that year, and few players followed each other. The knick's star player, Carmelo Anthony, followed none of his teammates.

Not causal. Which causes which?

keywords

- undergraduate research

- undergraduate methods

- correlational / observational


#cohesion
#cooperation
#undergrad-reading




















































# Sommers, Bohns "How can you tell if a consent search is voluntary?"


If you were asked by a cop if he could search your car, would you allow him to? Most people say no…but in the moment they say yes. We vastly underestimate how much pressure to confirm people feel in the moment itself. Also note the huge difference between what people “say” vs what they “do.”




90% of searches by police occur by consent, not from a warrant. Consent searches are legal so long as they are not “coerced.” The key legal question in consent search is whether a reasonable person would have felt free to refuse the officers’ request to perform the search.

When asked post hoc about whether a search was coerced or not, people underestimate how scared or pressured someone in the moment probably felt, and they overestimate the likelihood of refusal (had they been in the situation).


We conducted a series of laboratory experimenters to shed light on the psychology of consent. We approached hundreds of research participants and asked them to unlock their password-protected personal smartphones to be searched while they waited in another room. A separate set of participants (the control group) was approached by the same researcher and asked whether they thought a reasonable person would agree to the same request. This allowed us to compare what people think they would do when faced with an intrusive search request against what people actually do.

Whereas most people believe a reasonable person would refuse to hand over their phones, most people we approached—97%—promptly unlocked their phones and handed them to us when we asked (Figure 1).


Moving outside the laboratory setting, we also examined traffic stop data showing how often drivers who are stopped by police grant consent to permit a search of their car. The data shows that well over 90% of drivers say yes when the police ask to perform a vehicle search. But when we asked a separate group of participants to guess the percentage of drivers who consent, and offered a bonus payment if their guesses were close to the correct number, they guessed an average of 65%. Again, this shows that our intuitions about consent significantly understate the likelihood of compliance




keywords
- say vs do
- situational judgment tests / vignettes / personality
- motivation
- psych of performance
- why our survey studies mean nothing…because we ask people “what would you do…”
++ which is completely different from what actually happens




#conformity
#say-vs-do
#motivation
#why-surveys-suck










# dan soder social animal


angry about not being able to even be seen by this beautiful woman
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxHuSDMoOVc

you immediately feel better when you hear her talk with a super annoying voice. Ugh this girl sucks
Dan Soder, "She really is just fucking dumb"
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mocI9dM-jI
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/ChyNYKSMEcc


#social-animal





















# scientific mind quote

Science is very much a human endeavor, and the work of science relies on basic
human qualities, such as reasoning, insight, energy, skill, and creativity - as well as on
scientific habits of mind, such as intellectual honesty, tolerance o f ambiguity,
skepticism, and openness to new ideas, (p. 170)

#quote
#quotes
#scientific-thinking














# 10,000 hour rule alternatives


10,000 hour rule (Gladwell, 2008)
10 years for scientific genius (Ericsson et al., 2003; Simonton, 2011)
number of attempts for scientific breakthrough (Fleming, 2007)
Human trajectories (Song, Koren, Wang, & Barabasi, 2020)


“A greater probability of breakthroughs comes at the cost of a greater probability of failures.” (Singh & Fleming, 2010)

“I haven’t failed. I’ve just found 10,000 ways that won’t work.” Thomas Edison




keywords
- motivation
- psych of performance
- time on task
- 10000 hour rule


#motivation
#10000-hr-rule

























# Christopher Crawford NSF outliers or rock stars


Interesting writing about viewing things from a power law perspective rather than a normal distribution perspective.

Emergence of outliers in entrepreneurship
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1853586&HistoricalAwards=false




The overarching research focus of this project is to identify the primary drivers of outlier outcomes in entrepreneurship. Building a theory about the emergence of outliers is difficult under the assumption of normal, bell-shaped distributions of inputs and outcomes. Under the normal distribution assumption, outliers are usually cleansed from the analysis-either deleted or mathematically transformed-to reduce their influence. This project moves beyond the normal distribution assumption and uses theoretical assumptions and methods from complexity science. This theoretical approach has two advantages. First, a complexity perspective assumes that in relatively unconstrained environments, outcomes will likely be distributed according to a power law. This distribution is vital because traditional theory building and testing methods assume that the probability of an extreme event is effectively zero. A power law assumption can more adequately reflect the empirical distributions found in studies of emerging ventures. Second, a complexity perspective suggests that a system's outcomes are primarily the result of an interconnected combinations of inputs, including 1) an agent's initial endowment of resources, 2) the agent's rules for engagement with other agents based on expectations for future outcomes, and 3) the quantity and quality of environmental resources. Within this perspective, the emergence of a system from non-existence to existence occurs as a nonlinear, threshold-based process.



#rock-star-performance
#stars









# gurwinder 40 more cool ideas

https://gurwinder.substack.com/p/40-useful-concepts-you-should-know?utm_source=%2Fsearch%2Fbest%2520ideas&utm_medium=reader2





1. Baader-Meinhof Phenomenon:

When we notice something new, like an unusual word, we start seeing it more often. It feels like it's become more common but really we're just more alert to it, and we confuse our attention with reality itself. Hence conspiracy theories.

2. Ostrich Effect:

We often try to avoid info that we fear will cause us stress. Thus bills and work emails remain unopened, bank balances remain unchecked. This is counterproductive because ignoring a problem doesn't eliminate the problem or your anxiety; it only prolongs them.

3. Nobel Disease:

We idolize those who excel in a particular field, inflating their egos and afflicting them with the hubris to opine on matters they know little about. By celebrating people for their intelligence, we make them stupid.

4. Warnock's Dilemma:

Online content that provokes people gets more engagement than content people merely agree with, which incentivizes content creators to be provocative.

So much is alarming and enraging only because so much is trying to get your attention.

5. Google Scholar Effect:

We all get our answers from whatever tops the search results, so these results come to dominate a topic, muscling out unluckier viewpoints. Google has trapped us in an orgy of intellectual incest where everyone is drawing from the same tiny meme-pool.

6. Paradox Of Unanimity:

Researchers Gunn et al. (2016) found that when eyewitnesses unanimously agreed on the identity of suspects, they were more likely to be wrong.

The more people agree, the less likely they are thinking for themselves.

Therefore, beware of consensuses.

7. Epistemic Humility:

Instead of trying to be right, try to be less wrong. Avoiding idiocy is easier than achieving genius, and by beginning from the position that you don't know enough (which you don't), you'll gain more awareness of your blindspots and become harder to fool.

8. Mimetic Desire:

Craving is contagious; watching other people want a thing makes us want it too. It's why ads are so effective. But it puts us all into unnecessary competition as we fool ourselves into chasing what others are chasing simply because they are chasing it.

9. Overblown Implications Effect

“We think people judge us by a single success or failure, but they don’t. If you mess up one meal no one thinks you're a bad chef, and if you have one great idea no one thinks you're a genius. People just aren't thinking about you that much.”

—Ethan Mollick

10. Ellsberg Paradox:

People prefer a clear risk over an unclear one, even if it's no safer. E.g. They'd rather bet on a ball picked from a mix of 50 red & 50 black balls than on one where the exact ratio of red to black balls is unknown. Helps explain market volatility.

11. Veblen Goods:

We often attach value to things simply because they're hard to get. People will be more attracted to a painting if it costs $3 million than if it costs $3. The price becomes a feature of the product in that it allows the buyer to signal affluence to others.

12. Peter Principle:

People in a hierarchy such as a business or government will be promoted until they suck at their jobs, at which point they will remain where they are. As a result, the world is filled with people who suck at their jobs.

13. Meme Theory:

An ideology parasitizes the mind, changing the host’s behavior so they spread it to other people. Therefore, a successful ideology (the only kind we hear about) is not configured to be true; it is configured only to be easily transmitted and easily believed.

14. Gambler's Fallacy:

We often feel we're owed luck for being unlucky. "The coin was heads 10 flips in a row, the next flip has gotta be tails!" But probability has no memory; it won't make amends for its past behavior. Therefore, treat every possibility independent of the past.

15. Do Something Principle:

We often procrastinate because we're intimidated by our task. So make your task less intimidating by dividing it into steps and focusing only on the next step. Action creates traction, so each step you take will facilitate the next.

16. Lindy Effect:

The longer a non-biological system has existed, the longer it's likely to exist, because its age demonstrates its ability to weather the fickleness of fashions and the erosion of eons.

17. The Liar's Dividend:

Teaching people about deepfakes and other disinfo doesn't make them skeptical of falsehoods as much as it makes them skeptical of reality. Amid such confusion, they default to believing what they want to, discounting anything they don't like as disinfo.

18. Shibboleth:

An absurd ideological belief is a form of tribal signaling. It signifies that one considers their ideology more important than truth, reason, or sanity. To one's allies, this is an oath of unwavering loyalty. To one's enemies, it is a threat display.

19. The Potato Paradox:

Alice has 100kg of potatoes, which are 99% water. She lets them dry till they are 98% water. What is their new weight?

50kg.

Sound crazy? A reminder that the truth is often counterintuitive.

20. Throat-Clearing:

Before criticizing their own tribe, people feel the need to reaffirm their loyalty to the tribe. "I support X but..."

They do this because other people cannot comprehend that someone could see flaws in anyone other than the enemy team.

21. Law of Triviality:

A company needs a nuclear reactor and a bike shed. Few workers understand reactors, but all understand sheds, so the shed becomes the focus of debate as everyone tries to enact their vision.

Projects that require the least attention tend to get the most.

22. Chilling Effect:

When punishment for what people say becomes widespread, people stop saying what they really think and instead say whatever is needed to thrive in the social environment. Thus, limits on speech become limits on sincerity.

23. Reiteration Effect:

Joseph Goebbels said*, "Repeat a lie often enough and it becomes the truth," and he was right; repetition can make people believe things they otherwise wouldn't.

*Goebbels didn't actually say this, but everyone thinks he did because of the Reiteration Effect.

24. Naïve Realism:

We know others are biased, but think we see the world as it is. Thus, teaching people about biases & fallacies doesn't make them doubt their own beliefs, it only makes them even more doubtful of their opponents'.

Maybe posting this megathread was a mistake...

25. Purity Spiral:

Members of political tribes inevitably begin competing with their fellows to be the most ideologically pure. The constant one-upmanship toward moral superiority causes the whole group to gradually become more extreme. E.g. Maoist China, Twitter echo-chambers.

26. Kayfabrication:

Politics is pro-wrestling in suits. Opposing parties are collaborators in a greater system, whose choreographed conflict entertains and distracts us from what is really going on.

27. Postjournalism:

The press lost its monopoly on news when the internet democratized info. To save its business model, it pivoted from journalism into tribalism. The new role of the press is not to inform its readers but to confirm what they already believe.

28. Curiosity Zone:

Curiosity is the desire to fill gaps in knowledge. Thus, curiosity occurs not when you know nothing about something, but when you know a bit about it. So learn a little about as much as you can (like you're doing now!), and it will spur you to learn even more.

29. Sorites Paradox:

What's the minimum number of grains of sand needed to make a heap? We don't know, because human language (in this case the word "heap") is imprecise. If our language can't even quantify a heap, how can it resolve the complex questions we so fiercely debate?

30: Brandolini's Law (aka the Bullshit Asymmetry Principle):

It takes a lot more energy to refute bullshit than to produce it. Hence, the world is full of unrefuted bullshit.

31. Algorithmic Blindspots:

We find growth while searching for other things. Algorithms give us exactly what we want on demand, so we never need to search, and never find what we never knew we needed.

If you wish to grow, defy the robots' recommendations.

32. Longtermism:

a) Future people matter morally as much as people alive now.

b) There are likely many more future people than people alive now.

c) Small changes now can have huge repercussions in future.

If these are true, should we be doing more for future generations?

33. The Two-Minute Rule:

If a task would take less than two minutes, do it immediately. This is because adding the task to your mental to-do list, keeping it in your memory, and managing the anxiety of not having done it will take far more effort than just doing it now.

34. Promethean Gap:

Technology is outpacing wisdom; we're changing the world faster than we can adapt to it. Lagging ever more behind accelerating progress, we're increasingly unable to foresee the effects of what we create. We're amassing the power of gods, yet we remain apes.

35. Information-Action Ratio:

The mark of useful info is that it makes us act differently. Most info we consume doesn't make us act differently; we just passively graze on it like cattle before defecating it undigested.

Stop mindless scrolling and seek out info that changes you.

36. Gurwinder's Third Paradox:

In order for you to beat someone in a debate, your opponent needs to realize they've lost. Therefore, it's easier to win an argument against a genius than an idiot.

37. Media Naturalness Theory:

Writing has existed for <2% of human history, so our brains are not evolved for reading; we need vocal/facial cues for context. Thus, accept that you'll be misunderstood online, but never stop posting, for the only way to write clearer is by writing.

38. Tilting At Windmills:

An online stranger doesn't know you; all they have are a few vague impressions of you, too meager to form anything but a phantasm. So when they attack "you", they're really just attacking their own imagination, and there is no need to take it personally.

39. Principle Of Humanity:

Every single person is exactly what you would be if you were them. This includes your political opponents. So instead of dismissing them as evil or stupid, maybe seek to understand the circumstances that led them to their conclusions.

40. Empty Name:

We can be convinced that a concept is real by the mere fact that it has a name, but the world is full of names for things that aren't real (e.g. Batman). As such, assume nothing is true just because it has a name (including every concept in this megathread!)




#chris-williamson
#edge
#best-ideas-list












# Christopher Crawford [Rock Star Theory][Outliers][Power Laws] - presentation

The theory states that everything is power law distributed. Endowments, expectations, engagement, and environments follow power laws, and this drives power law outcomes.




It also states that when you expect power laws, you act differently. TEST IT.





Endowments: talent, genetics, experience, networks, intellectual capital
- power law distributed
- influences our expectation for future outcomes

Expectations: goals; envisioned future outcomes
- power law distributed
- drive action (which then drives outcomes)
- when you expect outlier outcomes, you do things differently than those who expect “normal” outcomes
- when you expect outlier outcomes, you “do different things” than those who expect “normal” outcomes.

These two things are related to engagement. Specifically, there are significant differences between agent expectations and endowments and they will be nonlinearly associated with engagement. That is, if you want to achieve outlier outcomes, but you don’t have the skills, you have to do things that normal people don’t (or won’t or can’t) do.

Engagement: total time, interactions, and degree of novelty in whatever you create
- power law distributed

Expectations and endowments are nonlinearly related to engagement. That is, if you’re really really good, you’re more likely to think and act in very novel ways.

Environments: local and global resources (people, money, information)
- power law distributed
- agents engage with environments to capture resources
- capture of resources is probabilistic. Outlier agents have higher probability for successful capture than normal agents. Those who have novel talent have higher probability for successful capture than normal agents.


The outcomes you then get (awards, money, land, etc) are power law distributed.





keywords
- rock star theory
- power laws
- environments
- psych of performance



#rock-star-performance
#power-laws















# teachers love

Teachers have 3 loves: love of learning, love of learners, and the love of bringing the first two together - Scott Hayden

#quote
#philosophy












# Christopher Crawford [Rock Star Theory][Outliers][Power Laws] - AOM proceedings


Everything is power law distributed. When PL’s exist, then change is not incremental, but cascading.

Crawford, Aguinis, Lichtenstein, Davidsson, & McKelvey (2015) found power law distributions (PLDs) in all resource-, cognition-, action-, and environment-based input variables, as well as all revenue-, employee-, and growth-based outcome measures. The authors conclude that all theoretically relevant input2 variables—those that make up constructs from theories borrowed from outside entrepreneurship, like the resource-based view, institutional theory, and self-efficacy—and all generalizable outcome variables—those that apply to all ventures, regardless of size, including annual revenue and number of employees—are decidedly not distributed like a bell-shaped curve. Instead, all inputs and all outcomes in entrepreneurship are power law distributed. In these distributions, high-value outliers disproportionately influence the statistical and behavioral properties of all observations in the system.

#rock-star-performance
#power-laws


























# hubert flirting




# Memorize

Excuse me, I know you're ready.
Say the word and I'm on my way.
What's your name?
You have a boyfriend? No, shoot I was gonna say the hell with him anyway.
You are gorgeous girl. You know you can always stop by. I'm trying to link. Trying to get your number. Let's hangout sometime. See if I can't get to know you.  
Don't overthink and analyze.
I have simple tastes. I'm only satisfied with the best.

If we could, then we should come together girl.
Why? Cause your top 2 and you ain't 2.
Why? Cause I have simple tastes. I only like the best. 

I can only imagine...in some vivid detail. 

I'm just trying to make sure you don't have to deal with any boys no more.

Your crib in the middle of the night.
I'm gonna make you miss me cause I can put it down right.
Girl I can put you on a flight.
You know a guy like me can change your life.

[How do you know I don't have a man?] Come on girl, you have broken heart written all over your face.

I got my eyes on you, you're everything that I see. 

Can I pull up? Can I see you later? Let's kick it.

With that little curl in your hair. You knew I was gonna like you. With those big juicy lips. You brought those in here knowing what they were gonna do. My goodness. 


I'm only in town for tonight. Let's kick it. You drink? You play volleyball? Let's kick it. Put it in rotation and then fire me your location. We only got tonight girl.


You know you can always stop by. 



Where you from? Oh shit. Can you say the number that comes after 4 for me? I like the way girls from XX say that number. 


It's my fault I can't blame no one. If we take off right now we can catch the sun.

You're driving me crazy. I need to see you and feel you next to me.


What's your name? Ooh yea that fits you girl. 


Man you got a look in your eye like you'd give a boy a good ol time. 


I got you laughing now. My father said if you can make her giggle, then you can make that ass jiggle. 


Can I see you? Can I pull up?


You are too damn fine to be out here by yourself. I need to get your number you're fine as hell. 


You're driving me crazy. I need to see you and feel you next to me.


This ain't time to play no games. 


I'm just trying to make sure I don't walk past a blessing. 


You gotta keep your head up. 


I'm trying to love you at your worst. 


I'm tryin to be your litle favorite. 


I bet your 2 cents are worth 37 dollars in change.


When you pat people on the back they probably list it on their resume. 



I bet when you flirt with danger, danger gets clingy. 





Can you hear it? It's your heart. It's crying out for me. 



You can do whatever you'd like. I want all of that. 



I'm working on it. I just need to be inspired. I need someone to motivate me.




My goodness snowflake you're sexy to me. 



I like you like a fat kid likes cake. 



I would ask you if you want to come up. But why would I ask a question that I already know the answer to?


You probably live vicariously through yourself. 

I bet both sides of your pillow are cool. 

In rome, they do as you do.

When opportunity knocks and you're not home, opportunity waits. 

It's well documented that I...



What's a nice place like you doing in a girl like this?



I'm due for a siesmic event and your dancing on the fault line.




You wanna start me up? Just open the choke and pull the cord hun.


I'm just trying to raise you up. 
Somebody's gotta take you out, somebody's gotta show you off. 


You've gotta keep your head up. Who's gonna love you at your worst? Can I love you at your worst?


Hey listen life without you is like broken pencils, its pointless. 





###################### To Use

## Memorize

Excuse me, I know you're ready.
Say the word and I'm on my way.
What's your name?
You have a boyfriend? No, shoot I was gonna say the hell with him anyway.
You are gorgeous girl. You know you can always stop by. I'm trying to link. Trying to get your number. Let's hangout sometime. See if I can't get to know you.  
Don't overthink and analyze.
I have simple tastes. I'm only satisfied with the best.
You're top 2 and you aint 2.

## come up

I would ask you if you want to come up. But why would I ask a question that I already know the answer to?

## convo

I have simple tastes. I'm only satisfied with the best.

I'm just trying to make sure I don't walk past a blessing. 

Your top 2 and you ain't 2.

I got my eyes on you, you're everything that I see. 

With that little curl in your hair. You knew I was gonna like you. With those big juicy lips. You brought those lips in here knowing what they were gonna do. My goodness. 

We should be team us

I'll walk a million miles to make sure you're happy


## flirt

I bet your 2 cents are worth 37 dollars in change.

When you pat people on the back they probably list it on their resume. 

I bet when you flirt with danger, danger gets clingy. 

I bet both sides of your pillow are cool. 

In rome, they do as you do.

When opportunity knocks and you're not home, opportunity waits. 

You wanna start me up? Just open the choke and pull the cord hun.






#social-animal













# political correctness


“Political correctness is America's newest form of intolerance, and it is especially pernicious because it comes disguised as tolerance. It presents itself as fairness, yet attempts to restrict and control people's language with strict codes and rigid rules. I'm not sure that's the way to fight discrimination. I'm not sure silencing people or forcing them to alter their speech is the best method for solving problems that go much deeper than speech.” 
― George Carlin


Keri Smith:
Many people use a lot of words to not say anything. 


Keri Smith:
- When the idea is expressed out of the mouth of a moron you can really tell how simple, absurd, contradictory, or verbose the idea is. 
++ She was talking about an academic paper expressed by someone not in academia
++ Same thing with computational modeling. If gives you the moron perspective
++ Most academic writing has much psuedoscientific veneer (Bary)



see images
racist-quote.png

#sjw
#woke
#anti-sjw
#anti-woke











# dean at Villanova

Empowering:
- "when I was in college, the feeling was much different. You'll either make it, or you won't, and whether you do is up to you."
- "we now have made a full 180. We want to ensure that everyone has the sense that they can succeed."















# higher education is about embracing uncertainty


Embracing uncertainty, knowing that you do not know, and that what you think you do know may be wrong—this is foundational to a scientific approach to the world. Over the last decade, and especially since Covid, we have seen an increasing focus on certainty, and on single static solutions to complex problems. Perhaps most alarming of all, those appeals to authority, and to silencing those who disagree, has arrived under the banner of science. #FollowTheScience, we are told, when that has never been how science worked. I hope, still, that the educational philosophy that I laid out here, as a young scientist who was yet to discover most of the joys of teaching, can once again rise up in institutions of higher education throughout the land.


#uncertainty
#academia
#learning















# arnold kling on: greater beuarocracy causes more middle managers and fewer true skilled professionals

The need to comply with government regulation serves to empower bureaucrats over technically skilled personnel.

Fifty years ago. . . Hospitals were run by doctors, newspapers by journalists, history faculties by academics, so your best career move was to be seen by your peer group as being good at the thing your organisation purported to do. In return you were assured of advancement and job security, which your boss had the power to bestow. Back then ‘Finance’ was called ‘Accounts’ and ‘HR’ was called ‘Personnel’. No one had an MBA.

Not any more. As a doctor, you may have been hired for your medical expertise by eminent practitioners, but you must defer to people with no medical knowledge at all.


#buerocracy
#red-tape

























# favorite poems

The cold within
http://www.allthingsif.org/archives/1405#cold_within

Don't Quit
https://www.all-creatures.org/poetry/dontquit.html

If
http://www.allthingsif.org/

What is success?
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6roYCQ1S2aU

Three Questions
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fj5BcN6Blks


#philosophy
#poems
#quotes




# the cold within

The Cold Within
Six humans trapped by happenstance
In bleak and bitter cold.
Each one possessed a stick of wood
Or so the story’s told.

Their dying fire in need of logs
The first man held his back
For of the faces round the fire
He noticed one was black.

The next man looking ‘cross the way
Saw one not of his church
And couldn’t bring himself to give
The fire his stick of birch.

The third one sat in tattered clothes.
He gave his coat a hitch.
Why should his log be put to use
To warm the idle rich?

The rich man just sat back and thought
Of the wealth he had in store
And how to keep what he had earned
From the lazy shiftless poor.

The black man’s face bespoke revenge
As the fire passed from his sight.
For all he saw in his stick of wood
Was a chance to spite the white.

The last man of this forlorn group
Did nought except for gain.
Giving only to those who gave
Was how he played the game.

Their logs held tight in death’s still hands
Was proof of human sin.
They didn’t die from the cold without
They died from the cold within.

#philosophy
#poems
#quotes






# don't quit

Don't Quit
By Edgar A. Guest (1881-1959)?
See Don't Quit: Who is the Author?

When Things go wrong, as they sometimes will,
When the road you're trudging seems all uphill,
When the funds are low and debts are high,
And you want to Smile but have to sigh.
When care is pressing you down a bit,
Rest, if you must, but don't you quit.

Life is queer with its twists and turns,
As everyone of us sometimes learns,
And many a failure turns about,
When he might have won if he'd stuck it out,
Don't give up though the pace seems slow,
You might succeed with another blow.

Often the struggler has given up,
When he might captured the victor's cup.
And he learned too late, when the night slipped down,
How close he was to the golden crown,

Success is failure turned inside out,
The silver tint of clouds of doubt,
And you never can tell how close you are,
It may be near when it seems afar,
So stick to the fight when you're hardest hit,
It's when things seem worst that you mustn't quit.


#philosophy
#poems
#quotes





# if

If-
By Rudyard Kipling
If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too;
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:

If you can dream – and not make dreams your master;
If you can think – and not make thoughts your aim;
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
And treat those two impostors just the same;
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:

If you can make one heap of all your winnings
And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings
And never breathe a word about your loss;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
To serve your turn long after they are gone,
And so hold on when there is nothing in you
Except the Will which says to them: ‘Hold on!’

If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,
‘ Or walk with Kings – nor lose the common touch,
if neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
If all men count with you, but none too much;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,
And – which is more – you’ll be a Man, my son!

#poems
#quotes
#philosophy




# what is success

What Is Success
 --- by Ralph Waldo Emerson

To laugh often and much;
To win the respect of intelligent people and
the affection of children;
To earn the approbation of honest critics and endure
the betrayal of false friends;
To appreciate beauty;
To find the best in others;
To give of one's self;
To leave the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child,
a garden patch, or a redeemed social condition;
To have played and laughed with enthusiasm and
sung with exultation;
To know even one life has breathed easier because you
have lived -
This is to have succeeded.


#poems
#quotes
#philosophy
















# are you garbage


Are you currently using a non-tupperware container as tupperware in your fridge?

When the adults in your family went out to eat to celebrate without the kids, did they go to outback?

Would you take someone elses left overs home from a restaurant?


Are you garbage questions
- Did your parents ever make you throw out a toy they just bought you because you hurt someone with it?
- When you make hot chocolate, do you put the chocolate syrup in first and then the milk, or the milk first and then the syrup?
- Have you eaten a hot dog on two pieces of wonder bread?
- Have you ever gone skiing with jeans?
- Did you ever take a family vacation where multiple cars followed each other?
- Did you eat of TV trays growing up?
- Ever have to call 911 on a family member?
- When you were growing up, did you have old rusty cars parked in your lawn?
- Do you drink milk with dinner?
- Did you continue to go to high school sports games after you graduated?
- Have you or any family members ever been involved in a parade?


#humor
#are-you-garbage




















# annoyed with dad

Repeat questions

Administrative questions

Like I'm 5. "Hey there is a better way to do that and I need to tell you." "Hey I need to make sure everything is under my control."
- walk with me to car to put my wallet away
- when I drive, you open the passenger front door and lock it, scared that I won't
- packing up my room, you literally came in and watched and asked if things in the room were mine
- Do you want an extension chord for your computer?
- While I'm reading, "hey do you want the light brighter?"
- down the stairs while working, are you cold do you want the fireplace on?
- morning up to work. why don't you drive me to work so that you can have a car?


You don't leave me alone
- Beach days, you always go to concession stand or first watch
- the day I stay home to work and have lunch on my own...you come back and make lunch while I'm there

Question everything I do
- why sleep so much?
- why eat so little? why eat so much?

Chew with mouth open
- eat ice cream by cranking spoon down on bowl

Constantly moving. 
- get home from beach. you can't just sit down and chill. you have to adjust everything in the house.







# Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

The talent of success is nothing more than doing what you can do well; and doing well whatever you do, without a thought of fame.

The highest exercise of imagination is not to devise what has no existence, but rather to perceive what really exists, though unseen by the outward eye--not creation, but insight.

Simplicity in character, in manners, instyle; in all things the supreme excellence is simplicity.

#quote
#philosophy
















# Hoffer quotes


# Reflections on the human condition



# Quotes - reflections on the human condition

1)

Both iron discipline and blind faith strive to eliminate the pause of hesitation before action, while the discipline that humanizes and civilizes aims at widening the interval between impulse and execution.

2)

Art is older than production for use, and play older than work. Man was shaped less by what he had to do than by what he did in playful moments. It is the child in man that is the source of his uniqueness and creativeness, and the playground is the optimal milieu for the unfolding of his capacities and talents.

3) 

It is a juvenile notion that a society needs a lofty purpose and a shining vision to achieve much. Both in the marketplace and on the battlefield men who set their hearts on toys have often displayed unequaled initiative and drive.

4) 

The central task of education is to implant a will and facility for learning; it should produce not learned but learning people. The truly human society is a learning society, where grandparents, parents, and children are students together.

5)

It is the malady of our age that the young are so busy teaching us that they have no time left to learn.

6)

Since man has to finish and "make" himself, there are unavoidably greater differences between individual men than between individual animals.

One must also expect chance to play a greater role in the lives of men than in the lives of animals. In the unfolding of the individual's life, chance is everything. In a vigorous society chance and example have full play, and in such a society the talented are likely to be lucky.

7)

The untalented are more at ease in a society that gives them valid alibis for not achieving than in one where opportunities are abundant. In an affluent society, the alienated who clamor for power are largely untalented people who cannot make use of the unprecedented opportunities for self-realization, and cannot escape the confrontation with an ineffective self.

8)

The education explosion has produced a horde of would-be uncommon people who want to live uncommon lives and do uncommon deeds. Hence the present appetite for historymaking on campuses and in intellectual cliques.

9)

We all have private ails. The troublemakers are they who need public cures for their private ails. 

10)

If a society is to preserve its stability and a degree on continuity, it must know how to keep its adolescents from imposing their tastes, attitudes, values, and fantacies on everyday life. At present, most nations are threatened more by their juveniles within than by enemies without.

Perhaps a modern society can remain stable only by eliminating adolescence, by giving its young, from the age of ten, the skills, responsibilities, and rewards of grownups, and the opportunities for action in all spheres of life. Adolescence should be a time of useful action, while book learning and scholarship should be a preoccupation of adults. 

11)

Is there a self-aware person who does not squirm when he remembers what he was like at twenty?

12)

In human affairs every solution serves only to sharpen the problem, to show us more clearly what we are up against. There are no final solutions.


13)

In this country, the prestige and rewards of intellectual pursuits have risen so sharply that many individuals with superb talents for wheeling and dealing and for building industrial empirres are now throwing their weight around in the universities. These people want to act, command, and make history, but being cast in the role of intellectuals they cannot face the reality of their innermost craving. They need the sanction of a holy cause or an ideal before they can let themselves go. They will grab at any idea or word floating in the air and employ it as an incantation to conjure action out of the void. It is the presence of these activist intellectuals which renders words and ideas dangerous. 

14)

It is a paradox of the post-industrial age that, despite its technical ominipotence, it is as domainated by words and magic as any primitive tribe. A haze of empty words, coming from the word factories of the universities, is corrupting the air of our ailing cities. The young lurch not so much from one illusion to another as from one cliche to another.

15)

They who lack talent expect things to happen without effort. They ascribe failure to a lack of inspiration or ability, or to misfortune, rather than to insufficient application. At the core of every true talent there is an awareness of the difficulties inherent in any achievement, and the confidence that by persistence and patience something worthwhile will be realized. 

16)

People who cannot grow want to leap; they want short cuts to fame, fotune, and happiness.

17)

It is to the creative mind only that a common occurrence can be as revealing as an outstanding event.

18)

The genuine creator creates something that has a life of its own, something that can exist and function without him. This is true not only of the writer, artist, and scientist but of creators in other fields. The creative teacher is he who, in the words of Comenius, "teaches less and his students learn more." A creative organizer creates an organization that can function well without him. When a genuine leader has done his work, his followers will say, "We have done it ourselves," and feel that they can do great things without great leaders. With the noncreative it is the other way around: in whatever they do they arrange things so that they themselves become indispensable.

19)

Any empty head is not really empty; it is stuffed with rubbish. Hence the difficulty of forcing anything into an empty head.

20)

What monstrosities would walk the streets were some people's faces as unfinished as their minds.

21)

Language was invented to ask questions. Answers may be given by grunts and gestures, but questions must be spoken. Social stagnation results not from a lack of answers but from the absence of the impulse to ask questions.

22)

Both the revolutionary and the creative individual are perpetual individuals. The revolutionary does not grow up because he cannot grow, while the creative individual cannot grow up because he keeps growing.

23)

It is doubtful whether there can be such a thing as collective shame. Collective resentment yes, and of course collective pride and elation -- but not shame. The association with others is almost always felt as an association with our betters, and to sin with our betters cannot be productive of a crushing feeling. 

24)

How frighteningly frew are the persons whose death would spoil our appetite and make the world seem empty.

25)

Sometimes it seems that people hear best what we do not say.

26)

No matter what our achievements might be, we think well of ourselves only in rare moments.  We need people to convince us that we are not as bad as we think we are.

27)

What we are looking for is not people who agree with us but people who think well of us and know how to express it. We cherish such people though they disagree with us.


# Quotes - Working and Thinking on the Waterfront

1)

To an intellectual, words -- parliament, democracy, dictatorship, fasicm -- loom large. To the general run of people the chief question is whether, and how smoothly, a thing works. 

2)

We talked about the backward countries and how terribly handicapped an American is when dealing with them. It is hopeless to try to win the weak over to our side. We have no ideology to impart, no faith to propagate, and no pride we can share with others. We have much to give in skills and tangible things. 

3)

What surprises me again and again in this country is the rapidity with which an experience is savored and exhausted. Each new fashion, vogue, and attitude is pushed up the hill with utter abandon, and once at the top it is allowed to roll back and into the ashcan. The senselessness of it si monumental. 

4) 

When a poor country wants to modernize itself in a hurry, it must know how to induce its people to work for words.

5)

During the whole day I have not spoken half a dozen sentences yet I feel as if I had been engaged in an interminable dialogue. The optimal milieu for me is to be surrounded by people and not be part of them.

6)

We sometimes assume that inner contradictions, if severe enough, may bring about the breakdown of a society or a system. Actually, vigor and creative flow have their source in internal strains and tensions. It is the pull of opposite poles that stretches souls. And only stretched souls make music.

7)

He is a typical lesser intellectual: interested in ideas, but without an inkling of what an original idea is. 

8)

Fair play with others is primarily the practice of not blaming them for anything that is wrong with us.

We tend to rub our guilty conscience against others the way we wipe dirty fingers on a rag.


9)

In the shaping of life, chance and the ability to respond to chance are everything.

10)

His directness and lucidity come as a surprise in these days of existentialist double-talk. One is no longer used to writing that says exactly what it means. 




#quote
#philosophy
#eric-hoffer




















# more humor



#
#
# the only one that matters: misdirection with everyday items ("clearly used for...")

Ah there's a girl walking in with one of those styrofoam containers you get from Outback steakhouse, clearly used for imprisoning the souls of all the men she's captured. 






1) Out of context or unexpected

Conan and heart outside bear
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=389nJrZjK1w

I said I wanted pancakes (2:47)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=De8TECO7JW4

Listen, ever since she was a young boy growing up in Brooklyn...



2) Bring back / connect to something that was brought up earlier



3) Metaphor 


My kitchen gets more use than Mel Gibson used his sword in Braveheart. (compare to Movie characters that people will know). 

Whose line:
- "If you know what I mean."



4) Extra phrase

I don't understand why people are still getting married. 3 out of 4 marriages don't work out. "Is this the line to lose half my shit? Great!"

Everyone I knew going into that major was subsequently working at sea world when they graduated. "Ya when I studied marine science at USD I examined how different rates of phosphorous effected plant growth in the san diego bay." "That's great sir, now we're gonna need you to clean the whale cage."



5) Great tags

"if you know what I mean."

"at 1:35...at 1:36..."

"there's an old italian legend/saying that..."

"one of them uses moisturizer..and the other one needs it."

[following a statement]. "And if elected, I will ensure..." "Ask now what..."

"I can only imagine...in some vivid detail."

"Although it didn't look great, at least it was hard to make, took all my time, and made my shoulder hurt for 2 days."

"Have you been eating too many sugar cereals?"



6) "You look like" and insults

The bottoms of his shoes are red so that he can get away cleanly after he murders the person that gave him that haircut.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qgtenO4l7k

you look like you put your whole mouth over the drinking fountain

you look like someone that has a blue pacard in their car that lets them park wherever they want

you look like a girl whose never taken a solo profile picture

I would prefer that you ask for my permission so that I could say "no." 

You have the brain of a 4 year old boy and I bet he was glad to get rid of it.

There's no need to bring your family into this.

New shoes huh. Lot of good that will do, you still have the same face.





7) pure jokes

What's the difference between 365 used condoms and a tire?
- one's a good year, and one's a great year


If a girl sleeps with 10 guys, she's a slut. But if a guy does that...he's definitely gay


Allergies? Cowards and weak-willed women.
Any history of mental illness? I have an uncle that does yoga.




#humor

























# hitchens and others quotes


It is what you read when you do not have to that determines who you will be when you cannot help it.

I have the simplest tastes. I am always satisfied with the best.

When I was young I thought that money was the most important thing in life; now that I am old I know that it is. 

I never travel without my diary. One should always have something sensational to read on the train. 

The theory is variable rich but function poor.

I mean what happens if Nicholas Cage walks in here and steals this national treasure?

Are we about to become patrick mohomies?

Ever since I learned that my male member was going to give me no piece I decided to give it no rest in return. 

I've worked myself up from nothing to a state of extreme poverty. 

You've got the brain of a 2 year old boy and I bet he was glad to get rid of it.

I think you've been eating too much sugar cereals. 

They put 2 and 2 together and came up with five.

It's not in my nature to be mysterious...but I can't talk about it and I can't talk about why.

You gonna go play some 5 on 1 there boys? Distribute some free literature...

You must not know my history. Let me tell you a little bit about me. I've...
no more fucks to give
my fucks have all run dry
I trained a mean fuck army but they all fucking died
...
...
I tried to go fuck shopping but there are no more fucks to buy. 


next time try to find something red to wear.

But if you are hear who is guarding the gates of hell?






"To laugh often and much; to win the respect of intelligent people and the affection of children...to leave the world a better place...to know even one life has breathed easier because you have lived. This is to have succeeded."
 ~ Ralph Waldo Emerson



In college you learn how to think and how to learn, in graduate school you learn how to think clearly.

That question has a long way to go before it is even naive. - Christopher Hitchens

There were 50 other ways to phrase that question that would have been stronger. - Christopher Hitchens

He can compress the most words into the smallest idea of any man I know. - Abraham Lincoln

People who think they know everything are a great annoyance to those of us who do. - Isaac Asimov

All the things I like to do are either immoral, illegal, or fattening. - Alexander Woollcott

Part of the money went for gambling, horses, and women. The rest I spent foolishly. - George Raft

Chase the god of wisdom, the goddess of wealth will become jealous and find you.

Nature gave us one tongue, but two ears, so that we may listen twice as much as we speak.

The best revenge is massive success.

Why do we have an ice cream scoop? For the same reason we have lingerie, it is reserved exclusively for intimate encounters, to trigger excitement.

A sea squirt is born with a brain and swims about to find a good place to live. Once it does so, it locks itself in and eats its brain. Brains are prediction machines that use past information to predict future events important for survival; once that is of no use, they are no longer needed.

Peace. It is not to be in a place with no noise, trouble, or hard work. It is to be in the midst of those things and still have calm in your heart.

People undergoing bodily therapies learn something, people on drugs don't. 

Be prepared, but never overblown. If you always knew what to expect then there would be no reason to experience.

The really efficient laborer will be found not to crowd his day with work, but will saunter to his task surrounded by a wide halo of ease and leisure. There will be a wide margin for relaxation to his day. His only earnest to secure the kernels of time and does not exaggerate the value of the husk. Those who work much do not work hard.

It's not what you look at that matters, but what you see.

True freedom is impossible without a mind set free by discipline.

Education allows your mind to turn on the world. Stop thinking that your mind only receives information. It creates and makes inferences.

Education gives you the creativity and imagination to stand in someone else's shoes, even if they don't agree with you.

It doesn't matter if you get the right answer if you are solving the wrong problem.

It's easier to identify bad writing from good writing rather than great writing from good writing. So it is with everything else in life.

A true artist can manipulate a dull scene into something beautiful. A true student can manipulate dull information into something fascinating.

Our intuitions about reality have not evolved at the subatomic or planetary level. We operate with the world only at the human level. Most scientific findings should be deeply counter intuitive.

This is the best restaurant hands down. Which do you go to with your hands up?

Never correct me, I'm an American and America is never wrong.

The standard pace is for chumps.

You will become way less concerned with what other people think of you when you realize how seldom they do.

Everything looks like failure in the middle.

Suffering is often worse in imagination than in reality.

The quest for certainty blocks the search for meaning.

I'm not looking for the best players Craig, I'm looking for the right ones.

Don't forget your game.

The true things he says are usually irrelevant, and the relevant things he says are usually false.

I didn't malign her, I told the truth about her, which was maligning.

Anxiety and success don't go together.

There are two tragedies in life. One is to lose your heart's desire. The other is to gain it.

Few people think more than two or three times a year. I've made an international reputation by thinking once or twice a week.

Imagine how hard physics would be if atoms could think.

Did you just order a five dollar shake?

Just because I rock doesn't mean I'm made of stone.

Well this is just a fist, but it creates a real mess when I start throwing it around.

Me. Fiction is fun because you don't know where the story is headed. Non-fiction is fun because you think you know where the story is headed, but you are often wrong.

Grandma: Writing must be easy for you, you do it so well. Nothing I do well comes easy to me.

Amateurs practice until they get it right. Professionals practice until they can't get it wrong.

What a terrible thing to say. If I cared about your opinion I might take that negatively, thankfully I don't.

You can say it with eloquence, style, with fury and anger, with economy of word and clever turn of phrase, but that doesn't make it a valid argument.

Never begin an idea with a blank sheet of paper.

Me. Confidence is being able to respond to the question, "How did the researchers do A or B in this paper?" with "...they didn't."

It's amazing how relaxing it is not to pretend to know more than you do.

One of the best ways to solve a complex problem is to reduce it to a problem already solved.

A gentleman is one who never hurts anyone's feeling unintentionally.

Me. Most people find pleasure in pursuing challenging goals. I find pleasure in knowing that you cannot handle them.

The art of being wise is the art of knowing what to overlook.

Confrontation, the only thing that brings life to thought. - Christopher Hitchens in a live video on Malcom X

I try to look into all the different fields for what they excel at and borrow whatever I can learn from them about how to think about various paradigms and then even to see the same paradigms prop up in different fields that are widely separated and nobody knows that the same way of thinking occurs across them all. - Eric Weinstein





"It is usually futile to try to talk facts and analysis to people who are enjoying a sense of moral superiority in their ignorance.” - Thomas Sowell




# chance and other stories

1) Kyle Dunnigan

Think about the character, "Flo" from progressive's car insurance commercials. She probably made lots of money from that role. 

In 2001, pizza hut was going to run a similar string of advertising with Kyle Dunnigan. Kyle was going to be the "Flo" of pizza hut. The ads were going to use the slogan, "an explosion of flavor." Mid-shoot, 911 happened. Executives decided to cut the commercials and never air them. Kyle didn't get paid. 

2) Tea saving people from disease, so great britain became a power

This story is embedded in the book, "the forest for the trees: systems thinking"

3) Pat McAfee gambling to go try out




McAfee attended Plum High School in his hometown of Plum, Pennsylvania, playing both soccer and football. As a senior, he borrowed $100 from a friend and played poker at an illegal poker club, turning it into $1,400. He used the funds to finance a trip to Miami to participate in the final day of a national competition highlighting the best field goal kicking prospects in America. McAfee made nine consecutive field goals, starting at 25 yards and moving five yards out each time. He narrowly missed a 70-yard field goal, with the ball missing to the right but with enough distance to make it. After returning home, he was approached in the school's lunchroom by Tony Gibson, West Virginia's recruiting coordinator, who offered him a scholarship.




Sometimes life just doesn't give you a chance.

Bill Burr 5-11-20 story about Broncos Black Quarterback.
- Marlyn Brisco

8:20 until 12:50

Was it racism or height? Marlyn didn't have the frame that people believed to be necessary.










In sum
- attractive
- not insufferable (pleasant; respectful)
- submissive/my frame of mind/men and women are different/sees me as the leader
- not going to stain my family name? are we bringing communities/families together?





She needs to understand that men and women are different. 
- We evaluate attractiveness differently (height, money, security, ambition)(attractiveness, no drama)
- We commit differently (fidelity)(putting a roof over your head)
- We process the world differently
- We have different interests
- We have different skills; we bring different things to society



She needs to not be insufferable
She needs to not be miserable
She needs to not be disagreeable
"When you speak with girls, sometimes the motor is running but no one is behind the wheel."


Don't just repeat cliches or buzzwords or phrases that you heard in college. It feels like talking to a robot. It's very unpleasant. 


Someone who can't see beyond her own nose. You have no idea what men want, and you have no interest in finding out. 


Women think about marriage as a wedding day and not a lifetime supporting and respecting their man


she needs to recognize that I'm number one. She needs to recognize that the man is supposed to be the leader; if a relationship doesn't work out, it's the man's fault because she started to not see you as a leader.  



Peace, quiet, bedroom fun.





Let's make this meal meaningful. Let's make this walk meaningful. I'm not in charge of much of what goes on in the world. Stop freaking out about climate change. It's important, but you shouldn't have a mental health crisis over it. 


Hate a girl who just adds buzzwords or cliche's and takes that to be adding to the conversation. Just don't speak. 
- listen to Whitney Cummings throw in sounds during Tim Dillon episode




Three contradictions that females don't seem to notice:
- 1) patrice fishing

"If you are dating me, why do you still have a boat?"

"Look at you, you can't even fish anymore."

- 2) share feelings

"You need to be emotionally intelligent. You need to communicate and share feelings."

"If my man starts complaining to me about his job or what he is going through -- if he starts becoming feminine -- I"m immediately turned off."

- 3) baby to take care of

They desire a bold, confident man who has his shit together.
Yet, they also want a broken entity that they can mold back to health.




# responses

No fair-minded view of yours would say that.

Perhaps then you would have the ghost of a point, but until then you don't. 

By all means.

I could summarize your view of me in a way that you would agree with. You could not return the favor. 

I quarrel with that statement.

It's difficult to answer politely a question that ends with, "your comments are banal." I would consider that an opinionated statement. Try reformulating it so that there is an actual question there. 

People avoid real issues that are within their own purview and instead adopt pseudo moralistic stances on large scale social issues so they can look good to their neighbors. 



# Songs

The world might not make it through the night - atmosphere
Lazy Daze in California - Language Arts Crew
Nuclear Family - Sweatshop union
Feather - Nujabes



#quote
#philosophy


















# patrice o neal mindset



# The patrice mindset.

- two conflicts for men: fisherman story
++ we're attractive for being good fishermen. When you change us into boring dudes in a relationship, we become less attractive
++ just like how a women needs to stay physically attractive, we need to keep our charisma by flirting with other women

- everything a man wants to be naturally is not righteous
- provide guidance. Dominate the mind.

Patrice on Marc Maron. Watch the entire thing.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2KutX6MNFU

Patrice on O and A episode 46, Koala Sandwich. 2:50:25 when he gives caller advice
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bN79KVCJl9A

# Honesty

Honest versus liars. He just wants to be honest, straightforward.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUDmOhd7ZHY

Honest versus pretenders. He just wants to be honest. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m2K6I23hETs

# Indifference

Always act like it wouldn't bother you if she left.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=21AU-sudsnU

# The same confidence & calmness you have toward whatever skill you have needs to be at play around girls

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZC8O-SH6gmY
2:16:39

Listen from about 1:30:00 and on if you want to hear the entire set up

Jim Norton:
- Women want to fuck who you are as oppossed to what you look like

Patrice:
- no pick up lines
- the confidence you bring is everything. The same confidence you have when you operate a skill that you are really good at; the same confidence must apply around women. You are better and you control what's going on. You provide guidance.
- Just like a girl needs to keep looking good for her to keep us, we have to keep up our "charisma such that other girls want to fuck us" for us to keep her. 


# Obligations when a girl gets fat vs a guy gets boring

Men want to cheat, innately. We want to chase. Don't make us feel bad about it, help us by  keeping us turned on throughout life. When you marry a pretty girl and she gets fat, she pulled a banana in the tail pipe on you. I'm no longer obligated to be with you.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yphJIVebYQ0
3:36:00

# Pay

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0l6S9OvaIpw
2:30 and on philosophizing about hookers
- "it feels weird to pay for it"
- when you do not invest for it? time, money, charm, you are always investing
- once you pay, it makes it real. Just like how when a girl hooks up with you early, now you can be real
- it's an honest exchange

# Prioritizing what we want vs what she wants

2:48:39 equating charm and pussy
- Girl: "I don't have casual sex"
- "Well I don't have causal conversations. Why is your concept that you protect better than mine?"

# In response to "girls should be allowed to wear whatever they want."

"Men should be able to handle seeing women naked. Get over it."

That movement usually doesn't acknowledge:
- our restraint
- girls flirt with guys by showing skin. That's all they can do.

Our restraint:
- If a girl cuts me off in a car and gives me that, "yeah what are you going to do" look, I have to take it.
- We give you that freedom. That's my restraint not to pull the car over.

Girls flirting:
- How do girls flirt?
- Patrice girlfriend: just a t shirt in front of the tv
- My girlfriend: put my hand on her boob. Literally come over and hump me.

So, you showing skin is how you flirt. You have freedom to assault us.
- You get to freely do what you do
- Yet we're supposed to show unbelievable restraint?
- we just want you to acknowledge that it's hard.





# I want my loneliness

Patrice on wanting to be lonely.


30:14 - would rather be alone in your house reflecting. I love you girl, but I need you to leave me alone with my loneliness, and I need you to not try to save me from my loneliness. I might be miserable, but I'd rather be alone. I don't want to talk to anybody.

My loneliness is so important to me. 

up until 31:02






# Women want cheating to be a disease. 

++ development
- Men have to develop charm to get pussy. We develop ourselves to get what we want
- Women aren't willing to develop themselves to get what they want, which is fidelity
- They call us "diseased" for it. No bitch, develop yourself. Find a way to keep me with the same passion that I developed to get you. 
- We compel them to open their legs. But they can't compel us to open our hearts. They instead write books saying it is a disease.

++ disease
- If I call you fat, I'm degrading your livelihood because fat is your natural embodiment.
- Well, cheating is what I want and is natural to me. I want to fuck a lot of women. By calling cheating a disease, you are degrading my livelihood.

1:05:45
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TJc41wygByc






https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTjWNaNag4U
- 48:00

# Quit being a sweetie pie

3:15:00



# another great vid on patrice logic overall

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwuEZjn4oPk



#philosophy
#social-animal
#patrice-o-neal
#patrice

































# Christopher Crawford "Outlier Antecedents, Processes..."


Entrepreneurs who eventually become outliers start their business with different resources and different strategies than other founders. Outliers think, act, and grow differently than the rest of the population.


But he never actually says what they do differently.


keywords
- outliers
- power laws


#power-laws
#outliers










# Markowitz - elite job creation


Experiment: elites come up with solutions to problems that match their domain of knowledge (mythbusting at google via data reveal). Lef professional but applied to developing technology and innovating and job creation. 


If markowitz idea is correct, then how come we don't see entrepreneurs creating technologies that take advantage of the current oversupply of low skilled labor? Because super educated elites 


(1) are super conformist
they figure out the game and then optimize the shit out of it

(2) follow rubrics
millenials need to be told what to do
the super educated will only think in ways that is consistent with using super educated work

(3) les professional but applied to elites/non-elites rather than fields

old les professional (chemist vs accountant)
my new les professional (elite chemist vs non elite chemist)

mythbusting: 
rumor at company. how do you solve it? show them the data and allow them to model it.

rob henderson:
getting into an industry low class vs upper class

---
When someone uses the phrase “cultural appropriation,” what they are really saying is “I was educated at a top college.” Consider the Veblen quote, “Refined tastes, manners, habits of life are a useful evidence of gentility, because good breeding requires time, application and expense, and can therefore not be compassed by those whose time and energy are taken up with work.” Only the affluent can afford to learn strange vocabulary because ordinary people have real problems to worry about. [christopher]: so maybe elites come up with strange and quirky ways of solving problems. 
"to illustrate this socioeconomic group theory in practice, imagine a discussion at three different family dinner tables. In each, a recently discharged veteran has declared that she is interested in developing her career in the fashion industry and wants advice on how to get started."

"The working-class parents might say, 'Well if you want to work in fashion, you are going to have to get good at sweing and sketching. How are you going to learn how to do that?'

"The middle-class family might say, 'To succeed in a fashion career, you might think about using your GI Bill to attend the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York or at least get into a good training program at Brooks Brothers or Macy's.'

"In the upper-middle-class family, the veteran might hear, 'You know our neighbor is vice president of merchandising at Neiman Marcus. You need to ask him out for coffee and see what he suggests.'







a) Markowitz ideas

Supply sometimes creates its own demand.

Elites create technologies that use elite labor over technologies that use middle class labor. 

Oversupply of low skilled labor just before industrial revolution. Manufacturing tech created, which could take advantage of all that low skilled labor. Many people moving into the cities and famine...which created a huge oversupply of low skilled labor. This low skilled labor was ready if only someone could come along and invent technology to take advantage of it. Then we get manufacturing and factories, and boom.

1990s just after space race...oversupply of engineering and math phds. Where do they go? Finance. Finance used to be low skilled labor. We used to have middle class loan officers (decide if this loan should be made). Now we have PhD level computational scientists who trade securities and deriviatives. The new form of finance does not produce better social welfare or more economic growth than the old form of finance. It does though make hedge fund managers super rich. It distorts the decisions of elites new-grads to go away from fields that may have a higher social product and into finance where they can make a lot of money. The basic math in securities has been familiar since pascal. The underlying economic models are from the 40s to 60s, but derivatives and hedging didn't get going until the 90s. The lag happened because the U.S. won the space race and ended the arms race (50s and 60s). The engineers had to find something to do. There was a workforce that had mathematics and derivatives skills which could now be deployed in finance. 

If you have an unequal training system that produces an oversupply of one kind of labor, we will find technologies to use them (but that may not be in the social interest). HIS FOCUS IS ON THE OVERALL SOCIAL INTEREST. Me: the thing that a low skilled person creates (as innovation or job creation or job crafting) looks much different from the thing a high skilled person creates. High skilled person: I want to innovate = creates something that is only useful to other high skilled people. Low skilled person: I want to innovate = creates something that is only useful to other low skilled people. 

Technologies develop in the social environment in which they arise. When you have a super educated super elite oversupply of labor, entrepreneurs will innovate and create tech in that space that will take advantage of this un-used labor source.  


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLEvJUNfyBY
8:39
the graduates of super elite schools go on to create technologies that change the labor force to create jobs that require bimodal distributions of labor rather than middle class labor. 


b) gerry ideas

Old U.S. large companies used to employ tens of thousands of workers (GM, Ford, etc.). 

Now, our largest companies (facebook, twitter, etc) only employ a few thousand, sometimes only a few hundred. 


c) le professional

Surgeons see the problem through a medicine lens
Engineers see the problem through an engineering lens
Sociologists see class and race and structure issues
Psychologists see distorted patterns of thought
Economists see inefficient markets and incentives

My idea: elites only think to create jobs and technologies that use elite labor. They have no way to imagine creating a position that uses low skill labor. 



d) mythbusting at google

but this isn't job creation. this isn't coming up with tasks for others to do. Well, it sort of is.



#grouped-ideas
#christopher-thinking
#elite-job-creation
#pg-mythbusting

























# Dionne Diversity, network structure, and effectiveness of collective design
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1734147&HistoricalAwards=false










# Dionne, Shelley D. and Sayama, Hiroki and Yammarino, Francis J.. "Diversity and Social Network Structure in Collective Decision Making: Evolutionary Perspectives with Agent-Based Simulations," Complexity, v.2019, 2019.




Diversity leads to poor coordination but better group-level decisions. Homogeneity leads to better coordination but an uncreative group level decision.


If a group is assembled by gathering similar individuals with similar backgrounds, expertise, and opinions, then the group tends to have less within-group conflicts but may risk having a greater group-level bias. On the other hand, if a group is made of diverse individuals with different backgrounds, expertise, and opinions, the group may have greater within-group conflicts but it may successfully reduce potential group-level bias and accomplish deeper discussion and better integration of ideas, as the diverse perspectives may represent the actual nature of the problem more correctly.




keywords
- diversity
- collective decision making
- group decision making
- team decision making


#diversity
#agent-based-model
#collective-decision-making
#binghamton




















# Luhman Propagation of memories within small groups and across social networks
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1456928&HistoricalAwards=false


#memory-propogation
















# Luhmann, Christian C and Rajaram, Suparna. "Memory Transmission in Small Groups and Large Networks An Agent-Based Model," Psychological Science, 2015,


Groups demonstrate collaborative inhibition: they don’t recall as many words as they otherwise could have had everyone worked on their own.
- a memory analog to process loss




Show people words. Ask them to remember. Now get into groups of 2 or 3 and collaborate in trying to remember the words.

Collaborative inhibition:
- a group recalls more than an individual, but a group recalls less than its potential
- potential being: total number of words recalled by 3 independent people
- happens because of retrieval disruption: I don’t have complete silence to work with my memory

As group size increases, collaborative inhibition increases.

After you go through collaborative recall, you are more likely to recall similar words as your own group in a later, individual session.





keywords
- process loss
- group memory
- collective memory
- psych of performance



#process-loss
#collaborative-inhibition
#collective-performance















# man vs woman decisions

take two couples, couple a and couple b, a man and a woman
in couple a, the man makes all of the decisions for a year
in couple b, the woman makes all of the decisions for a year
which couple comes out on top?


#fresh-fit
#gender-differences
#sex-differences












# 9 strategies to control your time

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ff12RsvjdPc

university whistleblower on woke psychiatry

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gcfxiASvLbI

#to-watch









# arthur schopenheur, jordan peterson, youtube quotes

Your boos mean nothing. I've seen what you cheer for. 

The clever are not so much looking for loneliness as they are trying to avoid the fuss created by fools. 


things are terrible. they will get better in time. it will take a long time
it is a competitive advantage to not have a competitive mindset


You need to understand the principles of life.
Then you need to live beyond them.  




#quote
#staring-ceiling
















# diversity scholarship ruining field

racism/antiracism and individual vs collective success
- cooperation lit: defector wins within groups, but group with more Ds loses
- anti-racist scholar wins, and our field's departments now focus on the criteria of allocating black and under-represented minorities to particular positions. As a field and as a country, we will be less innovative and less competitive. The big competition used to be scientific accuracy and rigor. The big competition now is whether you cite enough black people and talk about opression in your paper. 


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=61GJ5lQ_1Ow
46 27 for some reason, people in academia find it rude to write a paper saying "this is wrong."

#explanation
#mechanism
#edge
#anti-woke


















# what being an emotionally aware adult entails



1. There’s an underlying fear and anxiety to people who express bad behavior. You develop compassion for them and realize the world isn’t full of inherently bad people
2. You learn how to communicate your feelings and intentions for people to understand
3. You can admit your mistakes and take responsibility for them
4. You build confidence by realizing that everyone is just as scared, stupid and lost as you are.
5. You realize your parents inflicted pain on you because they are also suffering from their own issues. Anger towards them turns to pity and compassion 
6. You know not to confront loved ones yet when you or they are undergoing stress
7. You don’t harbor resentment for those that hurt you. You tell them what hurt, and if they get it, you forgive them. If they don’t get it, you forgive them too in a different way.
8. You aren’t obsessed with making your life perfect
9. You have a calmer, more forgiving and more patient approach to life
10. You see that everyone’s certain weaknesses in character have counterbalancing strengths, and look at the bigger picture than one side of the scale. You know that nobody is perfect
11. You find it harder to fall in love with people because you learn everyone is hard to deal with personally.
12. You know You’re also a difficult person to live with.
13. You forgive yourself for past mistakes. You become your own friend and love yourself
14. You made peace with your childish self, and learned to give it attention by yourself when needed.
15. You appreciate the little pleasures very much.
16. You don’t care what people think of you
17. You are better at receiving feedback and can listen to criticism without feeling threatened
18. You know how to deal with your pains and issues with perspective. You may walk out in nature more, or get a pet, or look at the sky
19. You recognize your past has influenced the way you react to things now, but learned to compensate the distortions that result, by accepting that you tend to exaggerate in certain areas. You learn to hold back your impulses or “first feeling”
20. You see that friendship is more about sharing vulnerability, gaining insight into one another’s troubles and worries


#quote
#staring-ceiling
#cognitive-behavioral-therapy






















# Maswood, R. Rasmussen, A.S. Rajaram, S. "Collaborative Remembering of Emotional Autobiographical Memories: Implications for Emotion Regulation and Collective Memory," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 2019.


When you remember events individually, you tend to be more negative than when you recall and reflect on events with a group.

When you recall events with a group, your memories become more positive and externally focused.




keywords
- group memory
- collective memory


#group-memory
#collective-performance
#collective-action


























# Maswood, R. Rajaram, S.. "Social Transmission of False Memory in Small Groups and Large Networks.," topiCS - Topics in Cognitive Science, 2018.


Review of some major topics in group false memories
- false info can spread through daily interactions. A co-worker describes an article, unaware of its inaccuracies, to a colleague. This colleague, despite having read the accurate reports firsthand, now recalls and shares a distorted version of the story with others.
- emotional info is more resistant to this social contagion transmission effect.
- people are more susceptible to this transmission effect if they are unconfident
- credibility of target matters




keywords
- false memories in groups
- social contagion




#group-false-memory
#collective-action
#group-memory























# Morgan, Jonathan H. and Zhao, Jun and Sedlacek, Andrea and Chen, Lena and Piper, Hayley and Beck, Yliana and Rogers, Kimberly B. and Hoey, Jesse and Schroeder, Tobias. "Modeling the Culture of Online Collaborative Groups with Affect Control Theory," Social Simulation Conference (European Social Simulation Association), 2019.

Affect Control Theory is an established social psychological theory of social interaction as emerging from an emotional desire to align one’s identity with culturally shared beliefs about the social order.

Terribly written. I have no idea with ACT is.




keywords
- bad writing
- scientific jargon


#bad-writing
#academese










# goshen 2022 - activists are dangerous


Activists are dangerous because they have a high risk of misstargeting -- mistakenly shaking things up that only appear to be underperforming.


Goshen, Z., & Steel, R. S. (2022). Barbarians inside the gates: Raiders, activists, and the risk of mistargeting. Yale LJ, 132, 411.


This Article argues that the conventional wisdom—corporate raiders break
things and activist hedge funds fix them—is wrong. Activists are no better than
raiders; if anything, they are likely worse. Because, as we argue, activists have a
higher risk of mistargeting—mistakenly shaking things up at firms that only appear to be underperforming—they are much more likely than raiders to destroy
value and, ultimately, social wealth.


















# Coyle Intelligence
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1620457&HistoricalAwards=false





# Coyle, T. R.. "Non-g residuals of group factors predict ability tilt, college majors, and jobs: A non-g nexus," Intelligence, v.67, 2018, p. 19.

Partial out G, now correlate those residuals with outcomes. The residuals predict. Non-g residuals of group factors measure variance unrelated to g and reflect specific abilities obtained after removing g.


keywords
- intelligence
- residuals
- error variance


#intelligence







# Coyle, T. R., Rindermann, H., Hancock, D., & Freeman, J.. "Nonlinear effects of cognitive ability on economic productivity: A country level analysis," Journal of Individual Differences, v.39, 2018, p. 39.




Cognitive ability shares a curvilinear relationship with economic productivity: G gets you even greater gains of economic productivity at very high levels of G.


Country-level cog ability and country level economic productivity. Scatterplot forms a curve sloping up from left to right. He finds that quadratic models fit better.


Cognitive capitalism theory:
The theory is based on the assumption that higher ability people contribute disproportionately to economic gains by creating innovations that amplify productivity. Such a theory contrasts with standard theories of cognitive ability (e.g., Spearman’s law of diminishing returns), which imply that the positive effects of ability on productivity decrease nonlinearly at higher ability levels (e.g., Coyle & Rindermann, 2013). These latter theories are based on the proposition that cognitive ability has diminishing returns to productivity at higher ability levels, because noncognitive factors (e.g., personality traits) drive productivity at higher ability levels.

Jumping from individual to country. Is CCT about cognitive ability and the performance of individuals that ramp up? Or is it about aggregate cognitive ability and aggregate performance?



#intelligence
















quilette or jap article on big teams are over-rated
- don't forget tyler cowen post about buraucracy/credentialism
- red tape favors large, boring firms over innovative small ones














# America is suffering a social recession

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/01/is-america-suffering-a-social-recession.html

Since 2000, American's have seen declines in sex, friends, trust, and church membership.

Also declines in...

percent of 12th graders who have
- gotten a driver's license
- tried alcohol
- gone on dates
- worked for pay

With the decline of the rest of social society, you are basically defined by your job and your job is highly contingent on your education. Everything that is not useful to education is shorn from childhood. And even once you get the bronze ring and get into your dream college, you will need to repeatedly restart your life as you move for post-graduate education, the perfect job opportunities, and sufficient housing to have a family. And should you misstep along this path? Well the internet is forever and it cares not that you sacrificed your lazy days of childhood for math tutoring, your high school sweetheart to move cross country to attend Stanford, or all your early 20s friends to take a temporary job in London - say the wrong thing or even maintain the wrong friendship and you can be vituperated and shunned.

#tyler-cowen
#marginal-revolution
#ob
#data
#descriptive-data






















# Today's scientific breakthrough's are less fundamental


The number of science and technology research papers published has skyrocketed over the past few decades — but the ‘disruptiveness’ of those papers has dropped, according to an analysis of how radically papers depart from the previous literature.

Data from millions of manuscripts show that, compared with the mid-twentieth century, research done in the 2000s was much more likely to incrementally push science forward than to veer off in a new direction and render previous work obsolete. Analysis of patents from 1976 to 2010 showed the same trend.


#descriptive-data
#tyler-cowen
#marginal-revolution
#decline-of-innovation



















# American higher education sucks not only because of wokeism, but also because of bureaucratization

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/01/what-is-going-wrong-with-american-higher-education.html

In my own field, economics, the prospect of having to do a “pre-doc” and then six years for a Ph.D. is driving away creative talent. On the research side, there is an obsession with finding the correct empirical techniques for causal inference. Initially a merited and beneficial development, this approach is becoming an intellectual straitjacket. There are too many papers focusing on a suitably narrow topic to make the causal inference defensible, rather than trying to answer broader, more useful but also more difficult questions.

In fact, many of the smartest young people I know are deciding against a career in academia, even if that was their initial intent. They see too much bureaucracy and not enough time for the academic work itself.

#red-tape
#tyler-cowen
#higher-education
#university
#academia
#marginal-revolution



















# wang et al 2013, "can't get it out of my mind"

We know that customer mistreatment compromises short term and long term emotional well-being, mainly through cross sectional and lab studies. 

However, little is known about the potential mediating mechanisms via which the negative effect of customer mistreatment goes beyond the service episode and persists to influence employees’ emotions at a later time.

We use a cognitive rumination lens: customer service can be viewed as a goal attainment situation. When it goes poorly, it leads to rumination, which acts as the mediator leading to the lagged manifestation of poor employee well-being. 

So
Use rumination (occurs when people don't attain goals) to overlay customer service event. 
Use rumination as mediator between poor encounter and lagged negative affect.

Cognitive Theories of rumination
Rumination is prolonged thinking about failed goal pursuits. 
Starts when someone fails to progress toward an important goal. 
[so it is defined as X but also happens after X]. 
Proximate underlying cause is accessibility of goal failure experience in one's memory. 

We conceptualize customer interactions as a goal-attainment opportunity. When this fails or goes wrong, employees may ruminate. 



[CHRISTOPHER - OVERLAY INTERMITTENT LEARNING]
rumination is worst when repetitive reliving of the failure happens. 
think about injury. when my neck hurts randomly throughout the day, that's worse than when I have a set time when I know it is going to hurt and I can turn my attention off.
X1 = repetitive vs one-time
X2 = random, unknown schedule vs fixed schedule

apply this to something you encounter. some work situation.


[CHRISTOPHER NOTE]
They are not theorizing into terms of downstream arrows. They are applying lenses over common workplace experiences. 
They are not doing A -> B -> C -> D
They are doing: look at A using X theory. 






# liao, lee, johnson, song, liu "seeing from a short-term perspective"

Why do findings from abusive supervision studies differ?
Two reasons: they are using static, between person approaches.
They are examining consequences without accounting for people's attributions of their leaders' behavior. 

People have different momentary (requires ESM) attributions (requires attribution frame) of their leaders' motives, which prompt different kinds of downstream work behaviors. 

Rumination: Control perspective of repetitive thought
Individuals experience recurring and automatic cognitions with an attempt “to resolve the goal discrepancy between stressful events and core beliefs and assumptions” (Watkins, 2008, p. 164). When working in organizations, subordinates, in addition to accomplishing task goals, endeavor to engage in constructive interactions and develop good relationships with colleagues, especially with their direct leaders (i.e., interpersonal goals; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995). Nonetheless, daily abusive supervisor behavior, as a particularly stressful work event (Tepper, 2007), leads to a temporary discrepancy between subordinates’ ideal–actual states regarding interpersonal goals, thereby triggering their repetitive thought. This reasoning is consistent with general self regulation frameworks, which posit that the presence of ideal–actual discrepancies interrupts ongoing operations and triggers cognitive processing aimed at eliminating the discrepancy (Carver & Scheier, 1998; Johnson, Chang, & Lord, 2006).

The valence and content of repetitive thought are shaped by subordinates’ perceptions of the extent to which resolving such a discrepancy is under their own control (Martin & Tesser, 1989, 1996; Watkins, 2008). That is, when subordinates perceive that they have control over resolving the perceived goal discrepancy, they tend to engage in constructive repetitive thought that involves contemplating causal factors and developing action plans for reducing it (Martin & Tesser, 1996; Wrosch, Scheier, Miller, Schulz, & Carver, 2003). However, when subordinates  perceive a lack of control over reducing the discrepancy, they tend to engage in disruptive thought about the unresolvable discrepancy and its uncontrollable causes (Trapnell & Campbell, 1999; Tripp & Bies, 2010).

Rumination is a dysfunctional form of cognitive processing that focuses on failures in achieving desired states and/or resolving goal discrepancies (Trapnell & Campbell, 1999; Watkins, 2008). The control perspective of repetitive thought suggests that the dysfunctional cognitive response of rumination is likely to be activated when subordinates experience a disruptive event (e.g., daily abuse) but feel incapable of improving or escaping the situation (Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008; Song et al., 2018). Consequently, rather than deliberating about potential strategies and solutions, subordinates will instead ruminate about daily leader abusive behavior by replaying the frustrating and emotionally disturbing episode in their mind and reliving the psychological harm that it caused (Liang, Hanig, Evans, Brown, & Lian, 2018)

So, any event leading to a perceived "there is distance between my ideal goal and where I am" will cause someone to reflect. If they believe they have control over the situation, they will think about causal factors underlying everything and engage them to make progress. Conversely, if they think the situation is out of their control, they will ruminate (frustrated, relive the emotional harm). 








# song et al. "a social mindfullness"

We know a lot about the consequences of customer mistreatment. 

Most studies assume that employees perceive true and accurate instances of customer mistreatment. However, The experience of customer mistreatment, however, is based on complex perceptual and evaluative judgments that may vary substantially within and across people.

So, examine how people attribute it. 
















Fixed intervals vs random intervals. Which is worse? Known upcoming or unknown upcoming?

All of this attribution stuff is about positive vs negative attribution. I attribute my supervisor's behavior to positive motives or negative motives. 

Another huge dimension in attributions theory is stability. This is long-lasting or this was a one-off. 









#christopher-theory
#christopher-thinking
#ob-notes
#rumination-theory
#chunked-ideas
#jap

































# Open source jobs and salaries becoming more popular

See this webpage
https://www.onemodel.co/roles-in-people-analytics-hr-technology

and remember salary transparency youtube video


#transparency
#salary-transparency

















# happiness chemicals

dopamine - reward
eat
achieve a goal
sleep

enorphin - pain killer
exercise
laugh
listen to music

oxytocin - love
socialize
physical touch
helping others

serotonin - mood stabilizer
sun exposure
nature
mindfullness

images/h-chemicals.jpeg


#neuroscience


























# farther along

1 Tempted and tried we’re oft made to wonder,
Why it should be thus all the day long;
While there are others living about us,
Never molested though in the wrong.

Refrain:
Farther along we’ll know all about it,
Farther along we’ll understand why;
Cheer up, don't worry, live in the sunshine,
We’ll understand it all by and by.

2 When death has come and taken our loved ones,
It leaves our home so lonely and drear;
Then do we wonder why others prosper,
Living so wicked year after year. [Refrain]


#music
#lyrics



# venezuela song



Usted piensa que yo voy a rogarle para que me quiera
Se cree importante del mundo la dueña
No más porque tiene lo que a mí me falta
Pero se olvida que todo no es la plata
Que el mundo está lleno de cosas pasajeras
Y ese fue su error y el orgullo la mata
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Que la nobleza que nace del alma
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Que la nobleza que nace del alma
Pueda ser que un día cualquiera no esté arrepentida
Cuando los años la tengan vencida
Teniendo todo y le falte el amor
Pueda ser que no me toque sangrar más su herida
Porque es muy triste sentirse en la vida
Culpable de ocasionar un dolor
Yo mucho la quiero y con desdén me mira
Pero me resigno soy buen perdedor
Yo mucho la quiero y con desdén me mira
Pero me resigno soy buen perdedor
Usted piensa que yo porque soy pobre no tengo derecho
A sentir amor dentro de mi pecho
Pero también tengo lo que a usted le falta
Un corazón lleno de noble sentimiento
Es querendón pero qué va no entiende de eso
Si analiza y pienso que nació sin alma
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Rodando se miran las cosas más altas
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Y rodando se miran las cosas más altas
Pueda ser que un día cualquiera no esté arrepentida
Que busque flores y sólo halle espinas
En el preciado jardín del amor
Pueda ser que no le toque buscar lo que hoy tira
Como si fuera un objeto se olvida
Que soy humano y tengo corazón
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción. por Hildy





You think I'm going to beg you to love me
The owner is believed to be important in the world
No more because it has what I lack
But you forget that everything is not money
That the world is full of fleeting things
And that was her mistake and pride kills her
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
That the nobility that is born from the soul
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
That the nobility that is born from the soul
It may be that one day you will not be sorry
When the years have defeated her
Having everything and lacking love
It may be that I don't have to bleed his wound anymore
Because it is very sad to feel in life
Guilty of causing pain
I love her very much and with disdain she looks at me
But I resign myself I'm a good loser
I love her very much and she looks at me with disdain
But I resign myself I'm a good loser
You think that because I am poor I have no right
To feel love inside my chest
But I also have what you lack
A heart full of noble feeling
It's loving but what's up, he doesn't understand that
If he analyzes and I think he was born without a soul
See that God takes but never forgets
See that God takes but never forgets
Rolling you look at the highest things
See that God takes but never forgets
See that God takes but never forgets
And rolling you look at the highest things
It may be that one day you will not be sorry
Look for flowers and only find thorns
In the precious garden of love
It may be that it is not your turn to look for what you throw away today
as if it were an object is forgotten
That I am human and I have a heart
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song. by hildy




el mundo está lleno de cosas pasajeras

the world is full of fleeting things


no hay riqueza más grande en la vida

there is no greater wealth in life
[there are no bigger riches in life]



Que la nobleza que nace del alma

That the nobility that is born [comes] from the soul








sabrosa (yummy, tasty)
divina

estamos a la orden

#music
#lyrics



















# collective swarm of scientific literature


christopher theory of theory
we also need a tool that helps us accumulate research

https://unanimous.ai/swarm/


construct
theory
data
discovery
argument


we should have a big list of all of this
a big image/visualization of all of this

then, your new study gets linked into it somehow



see also mcelreath version control talk


#christopher-thinking
#theory-of-theory









































# Future college students are far left of center


What does America's future elite believe? BAD NEWS for the Right

A poll of students taken at Phillips Academy, Andover, America's most prestigious private high school, gives us a glimpse into a future elite, and their views of sexuality, race, and politics.

This poll got responses from 80.5% of the student body. Many of these students are headed to Harvard, Stanford, Yale, etc.

Perhaps most jarring is the section on gender:

Only 60% of women said they're straight. 24% said they were Bisexual, 9.4% said queer. 11.1% said unsure.

What about their political beliefs? 

9.8% were conservative and 3.4% said they were libertarians.

36.2%, said that they were liberal. Another 7.7% self identified as socialists and 2% called themselves communists. 

27% of students have shifted to the left over the past year.

As one might expect, 96.6% of conservatives and 87.1% of libertarians said they engage in self-censorship. Only 55.6% of communists and 33.7% of liberals said the same.

What about race? Only 31.6% of respondents believe white people can experience racism. Even an overwhelming majority of white students (77.9%) say whites can't experience racism. 

Meanwhile, 90.9% support the Black Lives Matter movement.



#woke
#academia
#descriptive-data
#generations























# Better people analytics questions for providing company value

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-make-people-analytics-profitable-patrick-gallagher/?trackingId=KkxN1pXhqH2gLzrwO7fgNA%3D%3D

The solution, I believe, is this: PA teams need to move beyond reporting what’s happening, and get more into prescribing what to do about it.


“We have identified a trend of high turnover in the Production Division for new hires. Our latest listening data showed that workers’ feelings of autonomy were lower in that division, and that autonomy was highly positively correlated with rank, so that lower-level workers and managers felt less control over their work.

We then dug deeper. Because external data show that forming networks early predicts longer tenure, we conducted organizational network analysis and found that those new hires who stay longer are generally more able to form networks, but networks that largely involve people outside the division.


MOST PEOPLE ANALYTICS ROLES STOP HERE. BUT HE ADVOCATES FOR MORE.

Our enterprise training program evaluation system shows us evidence that our “Leaders 101” course increases followers’ autonomy and trust of their managers. We recommend that the division’s leaders all complete that course.

Our data show that that Vendor A’s team-building programs for middle managers have achieved good results with vertical and horizontal connectedness, so we also recommend investing in that program to help get everyone on board with the change of culture.

We expect that the cost of the programs will be $100,000, and removing the participants from their daily responsibilities for a few days at a time will add $50,000. We expect those costs will be offset by the expected savings from reduced turnover: We project a reduction in new-hire turnover from 60% to 30%, which would result in projected $200,000 savings the first year, and $50,000 additional per-year savings the next two years, resulting in a net savings of $150,000 in turnover-related costs.


#people-analytics
#overstepping-interventions
#interventions
#inference-vs-intervention
























# Different views on philosophy of science (objective reality)

[a] POSITIVISM

Positivism was the dominant philosophy of science for the first
half of the 20th century.

It is based on the 19th-century works of Auguste Comte and
John Stuart Mill and was further developed by the Vienna Circle
in the 1920s and 30s. • Positivism posits that:
1. A single, universal, sensible reality exists
2. Reality can be discovered through empirical methods
3. Science is value-free, objective, and dualistic

The goal of science is to find “explanatory associations or
causal relationships that ultimately lead to prediction and
control of the phenomena in question” (Park et al., 2020, p.
690). 

Theory and research in this paradigm tend to be reductionist
and deterministic (Guba & Lincoln, 1994; Hesse, 1980).

[b] POST POSITIVISM

In this paradigm, knowledge claims are warranted
based on the extent to which there is correspondence
across multiple explorations of the same phenomena

Post-positivism became an increasingly popular philosophy of
science in the second half of the 20th century.
o It emerged based on critiques of positivism from prominent
scientists, including Popper, Kuhn, and Lakatos
• Post-positivism asserts that:
1. A single, universal, sensible reality exists
2. But because of human limitations, reality cannot be fully
discovered through empirical methods

3. Scientific endeavors are value-laden
• To counter these limitations, post-positivism calls for a
pluralistic approach to scientific knowledge-building

o Known as critical multiplism, this central tenet of post-
positivism posits that the best way to investigate research questions is to conduct multiple studies and use multiple
methodologies—including both quantitative and qualitative
research—to surface common findings (Guba, 1990).


[c] Social Constructionism

Social constructionism also emerged as a popular philosophy
of science in the second half of the 20th century.
o Informed by the thinking of Marx, Durkheim, and George
Herbert Mead, sociologists Peter L. Berger and Thomas
Luckman first introduced the theory of social constructionism in
The Social Construction of Reality (1966). • Social constructionism asserts that:
1. An objective reality may exist
2. But all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, is a
construction—a shared social agreement created by
people through interaction, dialogue, and inquiry

3. These constructions are created to provide a basis for
sense-making within a community or social system
• Ultimately, constructionists argue that meaning and truth are
made, not discovered, through human endeavors such as
science.

Human knowledge is always subjective and relative,
influenced by social norms and representative of
just one of multiple possible perspectives of reality



#philosophy-of-science
#constructionism
#positivism

















# Ackerman "nonsense, common sense, and the science of expert performance"

How does one become an expert?

The extreme deliberate practice view is wrong.
The extreme hereditary view is wrong.

Common sense:

Practice is an essential component of expert/elite performance.

Obvious factors that constrain the development of elite performance
- physical limitations
- injuries
- absense of early critical periods
- aging

Amount of practice does not explain a substantial amount of individual differences variance among expert/elite performers.


The main problem with both the extreme nature and nurture approaches to expert/elite performance is the identification of “talent” as innate or fixed. Although genes are surely important in accounting for the range of individual differences in a variety of important characteristics (includ- ing intelligence), talent and other psychological constructs are developed qualities. In the context of intelligence and learning, Ferguson (1954, 1956), summarized this point by stating essentially that “With the possible exception of some learning which takes place very early in life, all learning occurs within the context of experience. We bring to bear on the learning of any task a mass of prior experience which may either facilitate or inhibit the learning of that task.” (Ferguson, 1954, p. 100). That is, humans are born with a relatively small set of inherited fixed action patterns (or reflexes). After that, new learning builds on what has been acquired before.


Summary

1. When it comes to expert/elite performance, both the extreme nature and the extreme nurture views are silly. (“Silly” is a term that philosophers sometimes use, see Bergmann, 1956.) It is only possible to explain individual differences in elite/expert performance by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, along with their interactions.

2. Although practice (motivated and deliberate) is neces- sary for expert/elite performance, it is not sufficient.

3. Not everyone gets to be an elite performer in most endeavors, because of physical limitations, mental limi- tations, and age of acquisition/aging factors.

4. “Talent” is not properly thought of as a genetic or innate endowment, but rather as a developed set of traits that are integral to the further development of expert/elite performance. In some sports, by mid-childhood, and for most sports, by mid-adolescence, a failure to learn and show initial excellence in sport will lead to inadequate ‘talent’ for ultimately reaching expert/elite performance.

5. Development of expert/elite performance skills is most likely a complex function of cognitive, affective, and conative traits that in turn, determine the direction, intensity duration, and effectiveness of practice/learning.


#elite-performance
#performance
#talent
#deliberate-practice
#practice
#learning
#intelligence
























# matthew crawford "how this thing works" is now hidden in our products

The disappearance of tools from our common education is the first step toward a wider ignorance of the world of artifacts we inhabit. And, in fact, an engineering culture has developed in recent years in which the object is to “hide the works,” rendering many of the devices we depend on every day unintelligible to direct inspection. Lift the hood on some cars now (especially German ones), and the engine appears a bit like the shimmering, featureless obelisk that so enthralled the proto-humans in the opening scene of the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey. Essentially, there is another hood under the hood. This creeping concealedness takes various forms. The fasteners holding small appliances together now often require esoteric screwdrivers not commonly available, apparently to prevent the curious or the angry from interrogating the innards. By way of contrast, older readers will recall that until recent decades, Sears catalogues included blown-up parts diagrams and conceptual schematics for all appliances and many other mechanical goods. It was simply taken for granted that such information would be demanded by the consumer.

A decline in tool use would seem to betoken a shift in our relationship to our own stuff: more passive and more dependent. And indeed, there are fewer occasions for the kind of spiritedness that is called forth when we take things in hand for ourselves, whether to fix them or to make them. What ordinary people once made, they buy; and what they once fixed for themselves, they replace entirely or hire an expert to repair, whose expert fix often involves replacing an entire system because some minute component has failed.


#crawford
#philosophy
#quote









# matthew crawford, "a man needs not boast; just point to what he created and say 'it works'"

As the philosopher Alexandre Kojève writes,
The man who works recognizes his own product in the World that has actually been transformed by his work: he recognizes himself in it, he sees in it his own human reality, in it he discovers and reveals
to others the objective reality of his humanity, of the originally abstract and purely subjective idea he has of himself.4
The satisfactions of manifesting oneself concretely in the world through manual competence have been known to make a man quiet and easy. They seem to relieve him of the felt need to offer chattering interpretations of himself to vindicate his worth. He can simply point: the building stands, the car now runs, the lights are on. Boasting is what a boy does, because he has no real effect in the world. But the tradesman must reckon with the infallible judgment of reality, where one’s failures or shortcomings cannot be interpreted away. His well-founded pride is far from the gratuitous “self- esteem” that educators would impart to students, as though by magic.

Boasting is what a boy does, because he has no real effect in the world. 

A tradesman feels no need to offer chattering interpretations of himself to vindicate his worth. He can simply point: the building stands, the car now runs, the lights are on. 


#crawford
#philosophy
#quote





























# klein et al. "Common ground adn coordination in joint activity"

Some devices for keeping people coordinated:

Agreement via communication
Conventions / rules for common practices
Salience so that someone's next move is transparent within the many moves that could have been chosen


#team-coordination
#coordination















# student teams ED474095 (1)

Inappropriate use of teams can undermine the educational process so badly that learning does not take place, students learn how not to learn, stduents built an attitude of contempt for the learning process.

Most research on student team process uses students as surrogates for business world teams and draws conclusions for that domain.

#academia
#teams









#  hackman the design of work teams




1. Interventions that focus directly and primarily on the quality of relationships among members usually succeed in changing member attitudes, sometimes affect behavior in the group, but have no consistent effects on group performance effec- tiveness (for reviews, see Friedlander and Brown 1974; Kaplan 1979; and Woodman and Sherwood 1980). The same appears to be true for structured techniques aimed at improving group creativity. 11
2. Interventions that structure group interaction to minimize opportunities for "process losses" do improve team effectiveness for certain kinds of groups and tasks (Green 1975; Stumpf, Zand, and Freedman 1979). Like the rules of parliamentary procedure, such interventions aim to (a) limit the amount of spontaneous interaction that can occur among members, and/or (b) structure the inter- action that does take place so as to minimize the opportunity for dysfunctional group processes to develop. Indeed, in the Delphi technique (Dalkey 1967; Delbecq, Van de Ven, and Gustafson 1975), members communicate only through summaries of their inputs compiled by a coordinator, eliminating the possibility of any spontaneous member-to-member interaction.

In sum, research findings regarding process inter- ventions suggest that structured techniques that mini- mize process losses (or reduce their effects) can be helpful. On the other hand, interventions that attempt to improve the quality of interpersonal relations among members or to promote synergistic "process gains" appear not to yield reliable improvements in group task effectiveness.


Most OB research is descriptive. Hackman lays out a normative model. This is what you should do.

The overall effectiveness of work groups is a joint function of

the level of effort members expend
the amount of knowledge and skill members bring to bear on the task
the appropriateness of the performance strategy



Conditions that support effort
- design of group: job characteristics model
- org context: specific rewards. positive consequences for excellent performance. reward the group not the individual
- group synergy: minimize coordination losses (does not say how)

Conditions that support knowledge and skill
- design of group: get talented individuals
- org context: not much to say here
- group synergy: minimize inappropriate weighting of member contributions. 

Conditions that support appropriate performance strategies
- design of group: people who are open to adaptation, to changing strategy and planning
- org context: group has access to data revealing how they are doing
- group synergy: again raises process losses


#ob
#hackman
#teams
#ob-notes









# honts "the importance of team processes for different team types"

Physical teams (like manufacturing or production teams) value action process behaviors.
Intellectual teams (executive teams) value transition processes like planning and strategy.


#action-processes
#teams
#ob
#ob-notes


































# arnold kling don't fall for the intention heuristic. Christopher's version is simply stochastics. 

What I call the intention heuristic takes two forms:

Good intentions necessarily lead to good consequences.

Bad consequences necessarily indicate that someone had bad intentions.

True wisdom requires discarding the intention heuristic.


#philosophy
#quote














# arnold kling and TC on science as a conversation

I read Tyler as saying that there is important information lost about a theory when you do not examine the process that led up to it.

In macroeconometrics, why did “vector autogression” become legitimate? Why did “calibration” become legitimate? Why did input-output analysis fall out of favor and get replaced by the production function? Why did multiple regression fall out of favor in macroeconomics but become standard for explaining differences in growth across countries?

One phenomenon that interests me about economics is that ideas get taken out of the context in which they were developed. For example, there are many uses of the “overlapping generations model,” but does anyone remember what the motivation was for developing the model in the first place?


Tyler Cowen writes,

In just about any scientific literature, there is an undercurrent of tacit knowledge which is not very directly expressed in any of the published pieces.  That knowledge may cover the following issues, among many others:

1. How the rules of the conversation operate, and how a body of literature on a question coheres.

2. Why certain papers and methods are not taken seriously any more

…Many of the people who claim the mantle of science might cite published papers, but in fact they have little or no understanding of science as a conversation and a body of literature.


#academia
#marginal-revolution
#economics
#philosphy-of-science
#phil-of-modeling























# best ideas of 2022



1. Solomon's Paradox:

We're better at solving other people's problems than our own, because detachment yields objectivity. But Kross et al (2014) found that viewing oneself in the 3rd person yields the same detachment, so when trying to help yourself, imagine you're helping a friend.

2. Cunningham's Law:

The best way to get the right answer on the internet is not to ask a question, but to post the wrong answer, because people are more interested in criticizing others than helping them.

3. Bonhoeffer's Theory of Stupidity:

Evil can be guarded against. Stupidity cannot. And the world's few evil people have little power without the help of the world's many stupid people. As a result, stupidity is a far greater threat than evil.

4. Anattā:

There's nothing constant about a person. Habits are picked up & dropped. Beliefs asserted & refuted. Dreams forged & shattered. Passions ignited & extinguished. The self is a work-in-progress being constantly rewritten.

And yet we’re all judged as if we’re final.

5. Gibson's Law:

“For every PhD, there is an equal and opposite PhD.”

In courtroom trials and political debates, anyone can find a subject-matter expert who supports their view, because having a PhD doesn’t make someone right, it often just makes them more skilled at being wrong.

6. Surrogate Activities:

The more we eliminate struggles from our lives, the more we create artificial struggles – sports, video games, Twitter culture wars – because the mind wants peace, but needs conflict.

7. Shirky Principle:

To ensure survival, institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution. For example, arms suppliers lobby politicians to push for new wars, and light bulb manufacturers deliberately make their bulbs shorter-lived so you buy them more often.

8. Babble Hypothesis:

According to multiple studies, what best predicts whether someone becomes a leader? Their experience? Their IQ?

Nope.

The amount of time they spend talking. It doesn't even matter what they say, just how much they say it.

We suck at picking leaders.

9. Noble Cause Corruption:

The greatest evils come not from those seeking to do bad, but from those seeking to do good and believing the ends justify the means. Ironically, few things justify the immoral treatment of others more than the belief that you're more moral than them.

10. Noise Bottlenecks:

Consuming online content makes us feel like we're learning, but 90% of the content is useless junk—small talk, clickbait, marketing—which crowds out actual info from our minds. As such, we feel we're getting smarter as we get stupider.


#chris-williamson
#ob-insight








# red tape and credentialism favors the incumbent

Regulation is the Friend of the Incumbent!

quote
this ist he other aspect that is going wrong in our field.
stricter and stricter standards for publishing means incumbents and already-established big dogs have advantage

#quote
#philosophy
#marginal-revolution
#economics
#red-tape



































# tik tok is a chinese time bomb

https://gurwinder.substack.com/p/tiktok-may-be-a-chinese-bio-weapon


But as our understanding of psychology has developed, so it has become easier to evoke other emotions in complete strangers. Advances in the understanding of positive reinforcement, driven mostly by people trying to get us to click on links, have now made it possible to consistently give people on the other side of the world dopamine hits at scale.

As such, pleasure is now a weapon; a way to incapacitate an enemy as surely as does pain. And the first pleasure-weapon of mass destruction may just be a little app on your phone called TikTok.

There’s a substantial body of research showing a strong association between smartphone addiction, shrinkage of the brain’s gray matter, and “digital dementia,” an umbrella term for the onset of anxiety and depression and the deterioration of memory, attention span, self-esteem, and impulse control (the last of which increases the addiction).

These are the problems caused by internet addiction generally. But there’s something about TikTok that makes it uniquely dangerous.

In order to develop and maintain mental faculties like memory and attention span, one needs to practice using them. TikTok, more than any other app, is designed to give you what you want while requiring you to do as little as possible. It cares little who you follow or what buttons you click; its main consideration is how long you spend watching. Its reliance on machine learning rather than user input, combined with the fact that TikTok clips are so short they require minimal memory and attention span, makes browsing TikTok the most passive, uninteractive experience of all major platforms.






The premise of the book is simple: the US is a paradox composed of contradictions: its two primary values—freedom and equality—are mutually exclusive. It has many different cultures, and therefore no overall culture. And its market-driven society has given it economic riches but spiritual poverty. As he writes in the book, “American institutions, culture and values oppose the United States itself.”

For Wang, the US’s contradictions stem from one source: nihilism. The country has become severed from its traditions and is so individualistic it can’t make up its mind what it as a nation believes. Without an overarching culture maintaining its values, the government’s regulatory powers are weak, easily corrupted by lobbying or paralyzed by partisan bickering. As such, the nation’s progress is directed mostly by blind market forces; it obeys not a single command but a cacophony of three hundred million demands that lead it everywhere and nowhere.

In Wang’s view, the lack of a unifying culture puts a hard limit on the US’s progress. The country is constantly producing wondrous new technologies, but these technologies have no guiding purpose other than their own proliferation. The result is that all technological advancement leads the US along one unfortunate trajectory: toward more and more commodification. Wang writes:

“Human flesh, sex, knowledge, politics, power, and law can all become the target of commodification… Commodification, in many ways, corrupts society and leads to a number of serious social problems. These problems, in turn, can increase the pressure on the political and administrative system.”




#descriptive-data
#tik-tok






















# Coyle, T. R.. "Tech tilt predicts jobs, college majors, and specific abilities: Support for investment theories," Intelligence, 2019. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.




Tilt predicts outcomes. Math tilt (math > verbal) predicts stem success. Verbal titl (verbal > math) predicts humanities criteria.

Predictions were based on investment theories (Cattell, 1987, pp. 138–146). Such theories assume that investments in one domain (e.g., math/STEM) enhance abilities in that domain but inhibit abilities in competing domains (e.g., verbal/humanities), yielding negative effects




keywords
- intelligence
- tilt
- g
- cognitive ability
- notice how small his theory sections are
- small theory writing



#intelligence






















# Jacopo A. Baggio , Jacob Freeman, Thomas R. Coyle,Tam The Nguyen, Trey Hancock, Karrie Elpers, Samantha Nabity, H.J. Francois Dengah II, David Pillow. "The importance of cognitive diversity for sustaining the commons," Nature Communications, v.10, 2019. doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08549-8


g reflects the variance common to mental tests (e.g. IQ tests) and measures the ability of individuals to engage in complex reasoning and abstract thought. Theory of mind ToM is the ability to model and reason about the intentions of others.

When resources are improving, groups with higher g perform better in commons dilemmas. When resources are deteriorating, groups with high competency in both g and TOM perform better.


keywords
- theory of mind
- g
- cognitive ability
- cooperation


#cooperation
#intelligence
#collective-action
#collective-performance
#theory-of-mind






# Freeman [social and general intelligence improves]


Same effect as above: groups with both g and TOM do well on commons dilemma.


keywords
- theory of mind
- social intelligence
- g
- cognitive ability
- cooperation



#cooperation
#intelligence
#collective-action
#collective-performance
#theory-of-mind
















# Rindermann, H., Becker, H., & Coyle, T. R.. "Survey of expert opinion on intelligence: Intelligence research, experts' background, controversial issues, and the media," Intelligence, v.78, 2020, p. 1. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2019.101406





Huge differences in what researchers believe the research on intelligence says depending on their political affiliation.


keywords
- polarization
- expert opinions on science
- media bias
- opinions in academia



#intelligence
#polarization
#expert-opinions-in-science
#lay-beliefs-of-intelligence






















# Wu What makes teams fail and succeed?
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1829344&HistoricalAwards=false


#nsf-example





# Wu, Lingfei and Wang, Dashun and Evans, James A.. "Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology," Nature, v.566, 2019. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0941-9 Citation details


One of the most universal trends in science and technology today is the growth of large teams in all areas, as solitary researchers and small teams diminish in prevalence1–3. Increases in team size have been attributed to the specialization of scientific activities3, improvements in communication technology4,5, or the complexity of modern problems that require interdisciplinary solutions6–8. This shift in team size raises the question of whether and how the character of the science and technology produced by large teams differs from that of small teams. Here we analyse more than 65 million papers, patents and software products that span the period 1954–2014, and demonstrate that across this period smaller teams have tended to disrupt science and technology with new ideas and opportunities, whereas larger teams have tended to develop existing ones.

science policies should aim to support a diversity of team sizes.


keywords
- team performance
- science of science
- team size
- collective performance
- psych of performance


#collective-performance
#collective-action
#science-of-science
#team-size






























# Battiston, Federico and Musciotto, Federico and Wang, Dashun and Barabási, Albert-László and Szell, Michael and Sinatra, Roberta. "Taking census of physics," Nature Reviews Physics, v.1, 2019. doi:10.1038/s42254-018-0005-3 Citation details

There was a time when polymaths like Galileo knew all the physics that was there to be known. Over the centuries, however, the body of knowledge spanned by physics exploded, encompassing topics as diverse as gravitational waves, graphene, or network science. As physics expanded in breadth and depth, physicists were forced to specialise,1 segmenting researchers into their narrow, specialised communities. How many physicists work in each subfield of physics today and how does each subdiscipline evolve? In which subfield are physicists “born” into and where do they migrate, if at all?


RESEARCH IDEA
- the psychological effects of not knowing the entire field
- harmful for control freaks
- good for collectives
- perhaps bad for satisfaction


#science-of-science
#specialization


































# Li, Jichao and Yin, Yian and Fortunato, Santo and Wang, Dashun. "Nobel laureates are almost the same as us," Nature Reviews Physics, v.1, 2019. doi:10.1038/s42254-019-0057-z Citation details


Us mortals do not play in the same league as einstein or newton. Prize-winning works by Nobel laureates tend to occur early within a career. By contrast, ordinary scientific careers are determined by the random impact rule — the most important work in a career occurs randomly within the sequence of works.


Also see “hot streaks in artistic, cultural, and scientific careers…” by Lu Liu
- hot periods, where an individual’s performance is higher than typical for a few periods, are ubiquitious
- they occur randomly within an individual’s sequence of works


Also see “quantifying the evolution of individual scientific impact”
- we find that the highest-impact work in a scientist’s career is randomly distributed within her body of work.
- that is, the highest-impact work can be, with the same probability, anywhere in the sequence of papers published by a scientist
- this random impact rule holds for scientists in different disciplines, with different career lengths, working in different decades, and publishing solo or with teams
- truly high impact discoveries require a combination of taking advantage of an opportunity and luck, and that increased productivity alone cannot substantially enhance the chance of a very high impact work.





keywords
- genius
- psych of performance
- power laws
- viral video on youtube…just keeping making videos
- luck
- chance


#careers
#genius
#psych-of-performance
#luck
#power-laws








































# Yin, Yian and Wang, Yang and Evans, James A. and Wang, Dashun. "Quantifying the dynamics of failure across science, startups and security," Nature, v.575, 2019. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1725-y Citation details

Cool intro, but can’t make heads or tails of it. Getting through times of failure requires a combination of learning and luck. Everyone has streaks of failure. You need to learn from past experiences, but also remember that each period is embedded with luck, so just keep trying.

“Agents who share similar characteristics and learning strategies may experience fundamentally different outcomes following failutres.”


keywords
- failure
- luck
- chance



#failure
#luck
#chance
#science-of-science
#near-miss










# social animal

tease her, don't interview her
"I used to have bad taste in music too"
"You're sweating, you must have been doing squats in the restroom before I got here"

#social-animal










# thomas sowell quote




Don't be the man who gains the world but looses his soul. 


#quote
#staring-ceiling
















# humor


I hope you know I've been watching youtube videos on how to rub your feet good. 
Oh if you gave me a moment I'd make it last a lifetime. 

Those clothes do not flatter you at all. Beautiful girl like you deserves a dress or nothing.  I happen to have no dress on me so I recommend we go with nothing. 




[humor; say things in fun ways]
That's all I needed to hear, hell yeah. Give the bull a green light. 


[humor]
do the voice of the person
You know those d-bags who talk about the company like they are an executive.
"Yeah man we just acquired 4 other smaller companies, so we're expanding our product."
Shut up dude, you just look at spreadsheets all day and no one knows you. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4831N5Z9utI
- 15:35

[humor / storytelling]
Give clingers before telling story substance
This event was bad. 
It was the worst thing I had ever experienced.
This thing was career ending bad. 




[humor]
He ran into you and broke your arm?
Shoot...I paid that guy to kill you

I've always wanted to appreciate how you see Italy.
To see Italy through your cold, lifeless eyes




Only a fool...

looks for logic in the chambers of a human heart
wears sneakers like that in the heart of pittsburgh
seeks wisdom and learning at an institution of higher education



You must be wearing that...
to hide that bifurcated devil's tail that hangs off your back side



Thank god your parents aren't here right now...
if they saw you they would die of shame





You me and the devil makes three

If I had a body like that I'd throw my face away


[describe but extrapolate to play the character]
Yeah some guys play the numbers game with women, that doesn't always work. It can turn you into a zombie.
Just out at a bar like
[zombie/depressed/dull voice]
"what's going on? Fuck you."
"what's going on? Fuck you."
"what's going on? Fuck you."



I was really in my happy place with Rick, talking endlessly...
When I'm with you...
spending time...
contemplating who we are...
It is endless torment...


So my GF is here, and she is working on a project.
And I have to say, this project is really turning into something. I love this project. 
People will say, well you are biased because it is your girlfriend.
But I want to make it clear, I am not a fan of my girlfriend. 




* Misdirection : before finishing telling something ask urself “what does my audience expect me to say now” and then say the opposite.

make associations

exaggerate it and make it silly

yes and

do this with everyday objects
do this with everyday events
do this with everyday people walking by



you look like hell
you look like you're ten years old








analogy humor
I have the balls of a roman senator (I want to have sex all the time)
She has the frame of a heroin addict
I have the timidness of a burn victim


she calls you late at night
you just pop up from push ups like "o hey yeah nothing going on"



I wouldn't know who that so-called celebrity is if he walked in the room.

If your mother was here she would die of shame. 


If I could get in the same room as my brother, they would need DNA testing to tell who the body was by the time I got through with him. 




[girl says something dumb]
That sounds like something you heard on one of those vampire shows
That is some shit you watch on vampire shows



[girl says something dumb]
I'm not sure if it was freud or jueng, but the gist is that if you make that statement and tell other people you are really fucking boring
I haven't been sleeping well. So if you could come by and start talking so that I could slip into a coma that would be really good for me. 


[add burg to the end of statement and ask if they are from there]
"I'm bad at golf"
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in non-elite-golf-burgh
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in Pennsylvan-not-good-at-golfs-burgh
"I love sushi"
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in Pennsylvan-everyone-chick-says-she-loves-sushi-burg


[another example of doing a voice]
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/PuBuZnUnVmc
"the surbaban mother, now larger then life, paces through the playground"



[hit the internet]
"this dude got schizophrenia and then started a youtube channel"
"right, because you know the first thing that comes to mind when I get schizophrenia? time to hit the internet..."
"when I get X, I think...time to hit the..."


[easy misdirection]
academics know two things: big ideas and alcohol

[easy misdirection]
Yes, I have pets...I have 3 dogs and a cat. They are all in the freezer, I'm preparing them for a barbecue next weekend. 

[analogy]
Porn is like coffee for me, it's gotta be black



[say the same thing in lots of different ways: e.g., farts]
this is an exorcism
this is a fart revolution
this is a mutany in the booty
it is the air downstairs saying "we are taking over"
this is a fart that is taking over your body and saying "step aside anal lips"



[you know X is bad when...]
you know your farts are bad when it causes the entire room to leave














# Wang, Yang and Jones, Benjamin F. and Wang, Dashun. "Early-career setback and future career impact," Nature Communications, v.10, 2019. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-12189-3 Citation details





What happens when people have near misses in performance? You apply for an R01 grant and fall just below the threshold?

On the one hand, it significantly increases attrition, predicting more than a 10% chance of disappearing permanently from the NIH system. Yet, despite an early setback, individuals with near misses systematically outperform those with narrow wins in the longer run.


keywords
- psych of performance
- failure
- chance
- relative miss



#near-miss
#luck
#failure
#psych-of-performance





































# Mirta Galesic

Low diversity leads to better coordination and therefore greater performance on simple tasks.

High diversity leads to greater insight but lost coordination and therefore is more suitable for complex tasks.

Higher diversity of opinions about possible solutions can be adaptive when groups face complex tasks, while lower diversity can help in collective solving of simple tasks. In addition, groups that have more homogeneous views, and are therefore better coordinated, often have an advantage in intergroup conflict. As a consequence, when group threat leads to decreased diversity of opinions, it might have negative effects on performance in complex tasks, but neutral or even positive effects for simple tasks.


https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1757211&HistoricalAwards=false


keywords
- diversity
- coordination
- team performance


#diversity
#coordination
#collective-action
#collective-performance
#nsf
























# waddoups "feedback-driven time segmenting: the effect of feedback frequency"


Recent tech makes it possible to provide more frequent performance feedback. But should you?
The answer remains unclear because effects of frequency are not well documented and difficult to isolate in practice.

Nathan's theory:
) part 1
Employees with the same work time horizon will create and focus on different blocks depending upon feedback frequency. 
One employee may perceive a year time horizon as 12 segments while another perceives it as 2 segments. 
) part 2
Time segmenting influences performance components.
Employees can increase performance both by finding new and better ways of completing their work (i.e., finding task efficiencies) and by increasing their effort intensity toward already known work approaches (i.e., increasing productive effort intensity).

Smaller time segments = urgent effort but no discovery of new task efficiencies



Theory writing
) part 1 time segments
People create time segments by referencing perceived important events.
Individuals use these segments for planning, goal setting, and action. 
Within the workplace, mental time segments are probably linked to workplace events related to employee jobs. 
Employees view performance feedback as an important event, so it will probably be used as a time segment creator. 

More frequent feedback = smaller time segments
Less frequent feedback = longer time segments

) part 2 performance components

Employees narrowly focus on current time segment
If short, employees will believe there is less room for exploring. 
If short, employees feel pressure to exert effort now within current exploitative domain

smaller time segments = effort
longer time segments = explore



METHOD
task
- screen filled with letters. Find the number of "J's". Enter into sheet. Do it again. 
- if you want, you can go to a different page to decode a short cut (letter digit decoding)
- this code then tells you how to complete the spreadsheet without counting letters
- as you complete the sheet, it tells you whether your entry was right or wrong
procedure
- explain task
- two ways to complete it: count digits, or find shortcuts
- you will be paid a $10 fixed wage
- receive a performance feedback report (number of successful boxes completed in X minute segment, formatted like an email)
- low frequency = 2 report emails (one every 9 minutes)
- high frequency = 6 report emails (every 3 minutes)
DVs
- time segment length questionnaire: "did you think of your work in terms of [1 = 3 minute chunks; 7 = 18 minute chunks]"
- number of shortcuts discovered
- effort = total output


Results
In high frequency feedback condition, participants report perceptions of smaller time segments and found fewer shortcuts.
Conditional on shortcuts, participants in the high frequency feedback condition also exerted more effort into counting letters. 



christopher summary
Significant worklace events like feedback reports =>
Employee perceptions of time segments =>
Short-termism effort (short time horizon) or exploratory behavior (long time horizons)




#feedback
#accounting
#surrogation
#time-segments
#attention
#paul-black
#great-paper









# grouped ideas on coddling and structure

coddling of the american mind
psychiatrists saying "we can't praise victimhood and micro-aggressions." Avoidance is bad. Slow acceptance is good. 
kate macdonald diversity crazy. 
millenials want a template and rubric for everything they do. 
#grouped-ideas



























in addition to the nuggets podcast
listen to this
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omhL30QBib0

#to-watch






#
#


You are stunning. Who are you?
I like the look; a combination of elegant and bad ass. I'm intrigued. 

Hi. You look like an interesting combination of professional and party. Who are you?


I have to say at one moment you look innocent and then the next you look like absolute trouble. 
You have an innocent posture but then when you look around/smile you look like a trouble maker


Your outfit caught my attention so I wanted to say hi. 

YOU ARE SO TINY!



NOT what do you do
but WHY did you get into it?
what are you passionate about?




Bad opener that close the loop: "Hi i had to come over here to tell you you look cute."
Better opener: "Hey excuse me you looked real cute I wanted to find out if you are really cool as your look suggest". 


#social-animal
#best-social-animal
#flirting-opener







#
#
#


Tell people how much you appreciate them; how much you love them. 



I prefer a quiet life safe from overstimulation. I would rather bear the cost of missed opportunity than to suffer the burden of taking on too much. 

#staring-ceiling




#
#
#

Old human traditions (sapiens): all that is worth knowing is transmitted via holy books. 
Scientific revolution: humans are ignorant. We can make real progress by acquiring and applying new knowledge.
What many in the 21st century fail to understand: we can never reach 100% knowledge aquisition. We are boundedly rational, as is our technology. 

#christopher-thinking





#
#
# grouped ideas

coddling of the american mind
psychiatrists saying "we can't praise victimhood and micro-aggressions." Avoidance is bad. Slow acceptance is good. 
kate macdonald diversity crazy. 
millenials want a template and rubric for everything they do. 
millenials want administrators to tell them how to have sex.

Hitchens predicts the "everyone becoming a victim" phenomenon

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9EggTX-Jbk
4 minutes

In the 1970s, feminism was about violently opposing the idea that the University act as your parent. If you had a beef against another student of any kind, it was considered babyish to go to the Dean and complain about your feelings. Now it seems that not just on sexual matters but on quite a lot lumped under the heading of correctutude, everyone wants more complaints procedures, more therapy, more litigation... for heavens sake, there is enough of all of that already in the wider society. It is not viruses that are making people behave this way, it is regression to infantilism. 

6 minutes

That's the next thing that is going to happen. The infantilizing I was talking about will happen. Everyone will start to want to go to the Dean. Men will want a share in the victimhood business. It will be unstoppable, completely negative, and boring. 


How hillary clinton met bill clinton:
They were both at the library. She walked over to him and said, "if you are going to keep looking at me like that, you might as well know my name." If you know what is now going on within campuses, where people are looking at one another in an inantile way, this kind of thing would never happen. 

The re-definition of rape led to a re-definition of evidence on campus. This should frighten everyone. 



#grouped-ideas
#coddling
#trigger-warnings
#microaggresions
#victimhood-mentality
#scale-items








#
#
# sign of narcisist

Therapist: tell me a weakness of yours
Narcisist: I have none. "I'm super easy to live with." A narcisist will ramble on about how others are terrible but will have nothing bad to say about themselves. 


#narcissism



















# bounded rationality, marginal thinking, sapiens

Old human traditions (sapiens): all that is worth knowing is transmitted via holy books. 
Scientific revolution: humans are ignorant. We can make real progress by acquiring and applying new knowledge.
What many in the 21st century fail to understand: we can never reach 100% knowledge aquisition. We are boundedly rational, as is our technology. 

#christopher-thinking














# Felix Warneken

Reciprocity is one of the major skills that enable humans to cooperate with others. When individuals take turns cooperating in a reciprocal fashion, they are better off in the long-term than individuals who care only about their own immediate benefit. However, little is known about the psychological skills needed. What features of the human mind enable us to engage in reciprocity? How can we explain when individuals are more or less cooperative? This project is focused on three psychological abilities that are hypothesized to be critical for reciprocity: The ability to plan for the future, to exercise patience, and to tolerate a level of risk.

Keywords
- reciprocity
- cooperation



#cooperation
#reciprocity
#nsf




































# Call et al. 2020 “Shining with the stars?”

If you want non-stars to perform well…

Should you concentrate starts in one group or spread them out across workgroups?

GSP = group star proportion.
- it has a curvilinear relationship with non-star performance
- GSP positively relates to non star performance up to a point of diminishing returns
- GSP = number of stars / group size




If you have a few stars but not too many stars…
- they display excellent behaviors and attitudes for non stars to copy
- they pressure non stars to perform well
- they bring social capital which helps improve the performance of non stars
++ these things happen assuming that non stars learn vicariously from stars
++ the authors assume vicarious learning but don’t measure it

If you have too many stars…
- then they vary a lot in what they demonstrate, so non stars have a harder time copying
- too many high status people means vie for resources and low cooperation




keywords
- psych of performance
- star performers
- strategy



#stars
#strategy




















# gurwinder best ideas from 2022

https://gurwinder.substack.com/p/the-10-best-ideas-i-learned-in-2022?utm_source=profile&utm_medium=reader2



1. Solomon's Paradox:

We're better at solving other people's problems than our own, because detachment yields objectivity. Kross et al (2014) found that viewing oneself in the 3rd person yields the same detachment, so when trying to help yourself, imagine you're helping a friend.

See Kross, Ong, Ayduk (2023) annual review of org psych and org behavior 
for distancing tools. In hard situations, you should distance yourself to view it more objectively. 

Grossmann, I., & Kross, E. (2014). Exploring Solomon’s paradox: Self-distancing eliminates the self-other asymmetry in wise reasoning about close relationships in younger and older adults. Psychological science, 25(8), 1571-1580.




2. Cunningham's Law:

The best way to get the right answer on the internet is not to ask a question, but to post the wrong answer, because people are more interested in criticizing others than helping them.



3. Shirky Principle:

To ensure survival, institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution. For example, arms suppliers lobby politicians to push for new wars, and light bulb manufacturers deliberately make their bulbs shorter-lived so you buy them more often.



4. Babble Hypothesis:

According to multiple studies, what best predicts whether someone becomes a leader? Their experience? Their IQ?

Nope.

The amount of time they spend talking. It doesn't even matter what they say, just how much they say it.

We suck at picking leaders.


5. Noble Cause Corruption:

The greatest evils come not from those seeking to do bad, but from those seeking to do good and believing the ends justify the means. Ironically, few things justify the immoral treatment of others more than the belief that you're more moral than them.



#edge
#best-ideas-list
#williamson






















# Gignac & Starbuc, "Exceptional intelligence and easygoingness may hurt..."

Is there a threshold for how attractive people find intelligence?

Yes. Higher and higher intelligence makes you more attractive, until you get to 90%...at which point more of it makes you less attractive.

Same with being easygoing.

Physical attractiveness, though, goes up indefinitely.




keywords
- attraction
- love
- social psych
- threshold


#intelligence
#attraction
#love






































# Musaji, Schulze, & Castro, 2020 "How long does it take to get..."

Reference for research on learning curves in different areas.

Org outcomes improve sharply with experience, rising through its initial accumulation phases before becoming subject to diminishing returns. A wealth of studies provide support to these predictions across a wide range of contexts and outcomes -- from hotel management and nuclear power plant operations to cost efficiency and survival.





keywords
- psych of performance
- learning curves
- organizational learning



#learning-curves
#organizational-learning





































# salary transparency street


Salary transparency street
1: interesting clips everyone can relate to
- clips asking people how much they make
2: once on site, useful information people will want
- salary transparency excel sheet (searchable individual salary data)
- market research guide -- learn how much you should be asking for
3: put useful info behind an email block

= now I have everyone's email (newsletter, update videos, brand merch)




So, the process ...

what can i create that people would want access to?

how can those things be put into little clips for youtube shorts?



scale items (love language / astrology new)
surveys
searchable information on meta analytic results (practical action thresholds.)
courses on data science / R programming / People Analytics / Statistics
the psychology of work slide deck
retirement calculator
what do we have research on vs not?
what do people believe there is research on?
what research would people like to see done?
ideas for graduate student social scientists



see photos within the salary-transparency-street folder


#business-idea
#mimic-business
#best-ideas-list












# Lapre & Nembhard, 2010 "Inside the organizational learning curve"


All about the learning curve. Awesome examples.


keywords
- psych of performance
- learning
- organizational learning




#learning-curves
#organizational-learning












































# Horowitz, Haynor, Kickham "Sociology's sacred victims and the politics..."

Survey of ideology among sociologists. Everyone believes that "structure" has a larger effect on behavior than biology.

"My colleagues cannot see the world clearly. Some view all findings through a lens of racial grievance. Others bend every single discussion to the topic of gender. They look at the world through a straw and miss a lot of what is going on."







keywords
- undergraduate reading
- undergraduate research
- political extremes
- activism vs science



#undergrad-reading
#political-extremes
#see-world-through-straw
#science-of-science
#phil-of-science



















































# Brown, Howardson, & Fisher, 2016 “Learner control and e-learning”

Training is now technology-mediated and autonomous. Employees have control over when, where, and how they interact with training programs.
- discretion over the behaviors of formal learning = learner control

Learning preferences do not affect learning processes (although people state that they have a particular learning style) (Pashler et al., 2008).

Self efficacy and master orientation matter for learning.

This whole review feels very removed from what we know about learning. Fluffy. Academic. I don’t get much from it.

They recommend paying attention to learner preferences. Does learner 1 prefer to control his environment or not? Does learner 2 have strong or weak control preferences?
- this is an individual differences approach
- what matters isn’t their preferences, but their prior knowledge




Start with learners having little discretion, but give them “illusions” of control. Then allow them to have more discretion. Use guided exploration. Then offer exploration-based environments and encourage errors.

### actual writing

Learners should initially be given relatively little discretion over features of the learning environment. As noted above, complete lack of discretion does not attend to learners’ control perceptions, which is problematic. An effective interactionist perspective of creating a strong learning environment that also fosters learner control perceptions would be to afford learners discretion over features of the learning environment that make the training content more personally relevant. For example, the training may initially give learners a choice between three modules, each of which contains different illustrative examples for the same knowledge and/or skills (e.g., Microsoft Excel for sales positions, analyst positions, and researcher positions). Learners could then choose which of the examples are more personally relevant, which would help individuals perceive control over the learning environment.

Once learners become familiarized with the basic concepts and skills necessary to navigate the technological environment, the training should become slightly weaker by introducing the active learning strategy of guided exploration, particularly with a focus on instruction-centric strategies that limit actual learner control (e.g., worked examples, error prevention). As learners become more proficient with both the training technology and the training content, the training can become even weaker by increasing actual learner control, even into the deep learner control realm. As the learning environment becomes increasingly weak, however, the role of learner control motives becomes all the more important.

In weak environments, the information available gives only implicit cues for behavior and therefore becomes more a function of individuals’ characteristics than of the environment (Fleeson 2004, Meyer et al. 2010). In the context of weak learning environments, this indicates that learners’ control motives guide behavior, which may actually hinder learning for people with certain motives (e.g., performance-avoid orientation), as discussed above in learner-centric perspectives of e- learning. Thus, additional interventions are necessary to ensure that learners adopt functional learner control motives (e.g., mastery goal orientation) and avoid dysfunctional motives (e.g., performance-avoid orientation) (Kozlowski & Bell 2006). This can be accomplished through the active learning strategies of error encouragement and emotion control. Finally, the learning environment may be transitioned to a pure exploration-based environment allowing complete surface-level learner control over, for example, pace and sequence. The instructional technology should nevertheless provide feedback about the appropriateness of any actions relevant to the open skills in question (see Kluger & DeNisi 1996 for a detailed review of feedback’s effect on learning and performance). In other words, we recommend that for both open and closed skill trainings learners not be allowed to control the deep-level control features of feedback.


keywords
- learning
- training
- e learning
- online learing
- adaptive learning


#e-learning
#online-learning
#adaptive-learning




























# Griffin & Curcuruto, 2016 “Safety climate in organizations”

Safety climate (group level)
- shared perceptions across individuals
- describe observable features of the work environment
- not evaluative or affective. just descriptors in someone’s mind

Perceptions become shared over time as individuals interact with each other and their work environment.


Here is my problem with our field:
- Griffen proposes that safety motivation is a determinant of safety behaviors
- WE ARE JUST CREATING CATEGORIES. TYPOLOGIES.
- TO PREDICT Y, LET ME CREATE A PREDICTOR Y_similar
- WE CARE SO MUCH MORE ABOUT CONTENT RATHER THAN FUNCTIONING.
- Hey I know, I’ll add a new construct to this nomological net
- Why can’t we take constructs that exist and expand on their functions?

You know what else we do:
- Literature X has a 2x2 box
- Literature A has a 3x1 box
- I’ll “integrate” to create a 3x2 box
- That’s all we do. Integrate boxes.


keywords
- safety climate
- annoying field
- critique of field
- integrating boxes
- poor science
- bad science
- intellectual light weight
- philosophy of science



#safety-climate
#academese
#bad-writing
#box-and-arrow






























# Metcalfe 2017 “Learning from errors”

Although error avoidance during learning appears to be the rule in American classrooms, laboratory studies suggest that it may be a counterproductive strategy. Errorful learning followed by corrective feedback is beneficial. Corrective feedback, including analysis of the reasoning leading up to the mistake, is crucial. Aside from the direct benefit to learners, teachers gain valuable information from errors, and error tolerance encourages students’ active, exploratory, generative engagement. If the goal is optimal performance in high-stakes situations, it may be worthwhile to allow and even encourage students to commit and correct errors while they are in low-stakes learning situations rather than to assiduously avoid errors at all costs.





### Amazing story about American (avoid errors) vs Japanese (errors) learning

However, Stevenson & Stigler (1994; see also Stigler & Hiebert 2009) and their colleagues conducted a landmark study in which they were able to videotape lessons in grade 8 mathematics classrooms in a variety of countries, including the United States, Taiwan, China, and Japan. Of most interest, given that Japan is by far outstripping the United States in math scores, is the striking difference in the teaching methods used in those two countries. Although there may be many other reasons for the differences in math scores, one highly salient difference is whether or not teachers engage with students’ errors. Videotapes show that, in the United States, set procedures for doing particular kinds of problems are explicitly taught. These correct procedures are rehearsed and emphasized; errors are avoided or ignored. The students are not passive in American classrooms. A teacher may ask for student participation in repeating, for example, a procedure for borrowing when subtracting. When asking a question such as, “Can you subtract 9 from 5?” to prompt students to answer, “No, you have to borrow to make the 5 a 15,” the teacher may fail to even acknowledge the deviant child who says, “Yes. It’s negative 4.” If the response does not fit with the procedure being exercised, it is not reinforced. Errors (as well as deviant correct answers) are neither punished nor discussed but are disregarded. Praise is given, but only for the “correct” answer.

As Stevenson & Stigler (1994) pointed out, praise curtails discussion and serves mainly to reinforce the teacher’s role as the authority who bestows rewards. It does not empower students to think, criticize, reconsider, evaluate, and explore their own thought processes. By way of contrast, in Japan praise is rarely given. There, the norm is extended discussion of errors, including the reasons for them and the ways in which they may seem plausible but nevertheless lead to the incorrect answer, as well as discussion of the route and reasons to the correct answer. Such in- depth discussion of the thought processes underlying both actual and potential errors encourages exploratory approaches by students.
Instead of beginning with teacher-directed classwork and explication, Japanese students first try to solve problems on their own, a process that is likely to be filled with false starts. Only after these (usually failed) attempts by students does teacher-directed discussion—interactively involving students and targeting students’ initial efforts and core mathematical principles—occur. It is expected that students will struggle and make errors, insofar as they rarely have available a fluent procedure that allows them to solve the problems. Nor are students expected to find the process of learning easy. But the time spent struggling on their own to work out a solution is considered a crucial part of the learning process, as is the discussion with the class when it reconvenes to share the methods, to describe the difficulties and pitfalls as well as the insights, and to provide feedback on the principles at stake as well as the solutions.

As Stevenson & Stigler (1994, p. 193) note, “Perhaps because of the strong influence of behavioristic teaching, which says conditions should be arranged so that the learner avoids errors and makes only a reinforceable response, American teachers place little emphasis on the constructive use of errors as a teaching technique. Learning about what is wrong may hasten understanding of why the correct procedures are appropriate, but errors may also be interpreted as failure. And Americans, reluctant to have such interpretations made of their children’s performance, strive to avoid situations where this might happen.”


###


When people have made an error, corrective feedback is crucial (Anderson et al. 1971; Butler & Roediger 2008; Hancock et al. 1992; Kornell & Metcalfe 2013; Lhyle & Kulhavy 1987; Metcalfe & Kornell 2007; Metcalfe et al. 2007, 2009; Pashler et al. 2005). It is not enough to simply tell learners whether they were right or wrong. People get virtually no benefit unless the feedback they receive provides the correct answer, as Pashler et al. (2005) showed (and see Bangert-Drowns et al. 1991, Moreno 2004).
- describe the reasoning process when doing so

Self-generated errors seem to be particularly important. When the participant witnesses an error rather than self-generates it, the effects on learning are weaker.
- but understudied
- we know that “researcher-generated” errors are just distracting
- but what about observing a fellow student making errors?
- we don’t know


When you are very confident that your initial answer is correct, but it turns out to be false, then you learn more. When you aren’t very confident in your initial (incorrect) answer, then you learn (or remember or recall) less.
- lots of support (472)
- contrast this research with studies showing that confidence is hard to break


Secondary benefits of encouraging errors
- sometimes the student’s initial answers are correct, so they discover
- indicate to teachers where people are struggling


Where did the “error free” idea of learning come from?
- Terrace (1963)
- also see Murray, who pointed to the self efficacy paranoia


### real world example of learning from errors


After-action review (AAR; sometimes termed hotwashing) is an army training method described by Druckman & Bjork (1994) in a National Academy of Sciences report (see also Morrison & Meliza 1999). The gist is that units of novice trainees engage in an action against a so-called opposing force that is extremely well trained and well versed. The novice unit typically is defeated decisively. The novices then undergo the AAR, in which rank is put aside and everyone is free to voice their view. A trained facilitator is present to provide helpful specialized knowledge and to ensure that everyone participates and that the sessions are nonjudgmental of the people involved. Every misstep is analyzed, and discussion centers around what people should have done and why. The concept is that more is learned from defeat than from victory, as long as the trainees have a chance to consider all of their mistakes and make plans to remedy them, and that such learning is better accomplished in a simulated battle rather than in actual battle. The next time the unit meets the opposing force, performance improves, and this encounter is also followed by an AAR. Only after many such battles, each followed by an AAR, is the unit ready for deployment. Within the military, there is much praise for this method. General Gordon R. Sullivan asserted that the “AAR as an essential part of training is one of the most important training interventions ever” (quoted in Morrison & Meliza 1999, p. 21). “Managed and conducted by those closest to the activity, AARs identify how to correct deficiencies, sustain strengths, and focus on improved performance of specific tasks, activities, events, or programs” (USAID 2006, p. iii).


###







keywords
- undergraduate reading
- learning
- error correction
- errors
- psych of performance


#learning-from-errors
#learning
#error-correction
#psych-of-performance
#undergrad-reading












# journal rejections don't mean anything. novel prize papers were originally rejected


Rejection of your paper or grant has NO relevance to the opinion of #research community. It is nothing but the opinion of one person.

Several examples:

1. The first paper on graphene was rejected from Nature because “it did not constitute a sufficient scientific advance”. Later, it was awarded a Nobel prize.

2. The first manuscript showing the microbiome-brain connection was published after 7 submissions that took 3 years. Today, this field has exploded. I expect it will get a Nobel prize in the future.

3. Theodore Maiman tried to publish a paper describing the first operating laser in Physical Review Letters and… got a rejection!

4. Peter Ratcliffe, who worked on cells’ response to changes in oxygen levels, got his key paper rejected from Nature (see photo). Later, he was awarded a Nobel Prize for this work.

And there are many other examples…


And yet I see so many young scientists stressing about rejections. For some reason, they seem to genuinely expect that the editors should know which study is truly worth it.

As a result, many rejections are met with surprise and disbelief: 
“How could they reject it? They publish so much trash, and yet they think our detailed 3-year-long study is not interesting to the community! WHY?”


Well, the truth is:

- Most editors have very little time to delve into your study. They can easily FAIL to recognize the potential impact of your study. Proper communication in the cover letter and clear writing style can help (although only to a limited degree).

- Many reviewers have little idea about the #science in your paper. But they can have a big ego. So, if they have a bad day or were rejected recently, it’s easy for them to find 1000 technical reasons to reject your paper as well.

- Most scientists genuinely don’t know if your discovery can make any impact. If we could predict the course of science, we would be living very differently!


My message is simple:

Forget about objectivity. #Academia is a very subjective world. Fight for objectivity but don’t take it for granted.

A great study will be found, cited and recognized. Disregard of where it’s published.

A bad study requires a high-impact journal to be found and cited. But the long-time recognition might be a problem.

High-IF journals are simply billboards. Their rejections do NOT represent the opinion of a scientific community.

Believe in your results.


#grad-philosophy
#academia
#woke
#reviewers-suck
#philosophy-of-science
#phil-of-science




























# tyler cowen - left wing pathology is neuroticism, what is right-wing pathology?

His answer: reckless anger directed at "elites." 


So what is the right-wing pathology then?
by  Tyler Cowen March 3, 2023 at 9:30 am
Recently I discussed the connection between high neuroticism and left-wing politics.  In passing I mentioned that the right-wing had its own problems, leading a few of you to ask what those were.

The classic response would be to accuse (credit?) conservatives as being low in empathy.  Whether or not you agree historically, that answer does not seem to me to be “of the moment.”  Instead, I see the more recent right-wing thinkers as falling into a different camp.  The pathology I observe most frequently and most intensely is a kind of reckless anger, directed at some semi-imaginary, hypostatized notion of “elites.”  In an almost Pavlovian fashion, you can pump up this group by putting out some “bait” about “the elites” and seeing the resentment fly.  To be clear, as with the left-wing, this pathology does not have to mean the right-wing thinkers are wrong on the issues themselves.  After all, maybe Lab Leak did indeed happen, or whatever other claim you might wish to debate.  But when one of these sensitive topics comes up, yes right-wing thinkers do often respond to it pathologically and with an excess of emotion.  Born out of their sense of their own failures, they can be the true snowflakes.

You can see this in the comments section of MR every single day.  Maybe even today.  No surprise that the neurotic left-wingers will notice this and be disturbed by it!


#tyler-cowen

















# great phrase - strong impatience with too many details

There is a low correlation between IQ and income. Cowen doesn't give opinion on why. But one of his commenters does: leaders and people who work their way up on corporate have a huge hatred for too many details. 


The link between IQ and income is overrated
by  Tyler Cowen March 3, 2023 at 3:21 am in Economics
Garett Jones was the one who first put me on to this idea, now it is in a Bloomberg column, excerpt:

The evidence is striking. One study of CEOs of large Swedish companies found that on average they ranked at the 83rd percentile of measured IQ (for CEOs of smaller companies, the rank was the 66th percentile). That’s above average, but it’s hardly a cluster at the top of the distribution. Many CEOs undoubtedly achieved their position through hard work, charisma, people skills and other abilities, not to mention luck.

In the broader distribution, the connection between IQ and income is also positive but underwhelming. One study concluded that moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of IQ correlates with a 10% to 16% boost in earnings. That may feel significant when you get it, but it doesn’t push you into a whole new socioeconomic class.

The connection between IQ and achievement at the very highest tiers is in my view still an open question.  Here are some recent results, in my view not yet confirmed as the correct overall point of view:

One recent study, also based on Swedish data, showed two results of significance. First, much of the intelligence-earnings correlation weakens significantly and plateaus above salaries of 60,000 euros a year. Second, and perhaps more surprising, people in the top 1% of earners had lower IQs than the earners immediately beneath them.

Why that is the case, it’s hard to say. But one possibility is that the very smartest people prefer a more balanced life rather than working all the time. Or perhaps they prefer occupations with higher status and somewhat lower pay. Money isn’t the only thing you can enjoy. Maybe having a lot of it can make it harder to trust potential friends or spouses.

Recommended.

 106 CommentsFacebookTwitterRSS Feed print
Comments
Sort by Top
IQ 125 Overlords2023-03-03 04:40:59
	67		0
Hide Replies

This effect is striking once you start to really cavort with the wealthy and ultra-wealthy. Among the millionaires I know, not one of them comes close the raw analysis, recall, and synthesis capabilities of the four weirdos I met the one time I went to an Astral Codex Ten meetup. I think ultra high-iq tends to pull one towards dilettantism, whereas most wealthy and successful people comfortably devote themselves to developing a mundane, if profitable skill set from a young age. The exceptions come in the forms of Gates and Jobs type billionaires, for whom strange dilettantism lands them in the center of a cutting edge field that squares well with the production of monetizable product.

Respond
Ian2023-03-03 05:57:26
	36		1
Hide Replies

Along the same lines, every executive I’ve interacted possessed a trait that I would describe as impatience with too many details. It’s a form of synthesis, but one that I imagine doesn’t correlate well with standard methods for measuring IQ.

Respond
Dinwar2023-03-03 08:08:22
	13		2
Hide Replies

As I've moved up the corporate ladder I've found this to be an essential skill.

When I was a field grunt the nuances of taking samples was critical. Whether a well had a wasp in it or was covered in kudzu or had other issues was an immediate problem that I had to solve. When I became a team leader, I didn't have time for those details--I expected my team to solve them, because I was negotiating access and ensuring compliance with SOPs and dealing with logistics and supply issues. As a project manager I expect my field teams to deal with that, because I'm focused on negotiating contracts with people and getting work for my team and helping establish the SOPs they operate under.

At each step I obtained a broader view but at the cost of details. If I remain stuck in the quagmire of the details, I can't deal with the broader issues. If I want to deal with the broader issues, I can't be stuck in the weeds. I need to understand those weeds, because it's what the broader outlook is based on, but I can't be focused on them.

Does this correlate with IQ? I frankly don't care. I have always argued that at best IQ is a crude attempt to measure something that wasn't understood at the time (at worst it was a tool for naked oppression and violence). Modern views include 8 types of intelligence, ranging from kinesthetic intelligence to logic and mathematical intelligence to interpersonal intelligence, and I for one am not convinced that any single numeric value is sufficient to give an indication of the complex interactions between these.

Respond
Michael Stack2023-03-03 10:03:03
	10		0

Many years ago, at the beginning of my career, I was working on a technical problem with other developers on my team. It had taken us weeks and we were no closer to a solution. In retrospect, I see now that the problem wasn't just technical, but a combination of technical issues and process problems.

After weeks of making little progress, we convened a meeting with the heads of the technology department. The IT manager and I were there early, and started making small talk. He asked me about the nature of the problem, and I spent a few minutes trying to explain how complicated it was.

After a minute or two of this, he said, "OK, so the problem is really X" and I realized he was right. Weeks of trying to figure it out, and he'd essentially solved the problem by only hearing a high-level summary.

That was when I realized there were skill sets I didn't even know about, and how little I really understood about the nature of jobs like an IT manager's.

Respond
Anti-Gnostic2023-03-03 12:08:35
	4		0

I don't think even the psychometricians argue with this. But what has been deemed hatefacts are that these intelligences and their proficiency in individuals is unevenly distributed, and appears to have a substantial hereditary component.

Respond
Gman2023-03-03 15:08:49
	0		0

How about the link between IQ and skill as a doctor, lawyer or programmer?

Respond
JMK2023-03-03 06:55:27
	28		2
Hide Replies

If you have a high IQ, and if you want to use it, then your career options will be limited to work that requires it. Yet most jobs, including executive-level ones, are just that: Jobs. Which means you’re performing a *role* that *somebody else*, usually of lower IQ, came up with. They require that you cage your mind as if it’s a lion in a zoo. Few high-powered intellects will want to settle for that.

Which is why your weirdos were at a Meetup, not at work.



#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen








































# boredom


You need to lose yourself in boredom for self-reflection, and this only happens during uninterrupted time spent in solitude. 


Superficial boredom is common and refers to a situational restlessness in which
people desire distractions. In contrast, profound boredom refers to an existential discomfort in
which people struggle with their sense of self, but ultimately can result in the discovery of tribal
passions. 

Profound boredom stems from an abundance of uninterrupted time spent in relative solitude.

Murphy et al. "mundane emotions: losing yourself in boredom"


#boredom
#self-reflection
#meta-cognition














# ob notes








# grant prosocial motivation review

Prosocial motivation
The desire to expend effort to benefit others.

PM leads to good things for both individuals and orgs. 
A first key mechanism is social capital. A number of studies have shown that prosocial motives and behaviors build status, trust, and goodwill (Anderson et al. 2020, Flynn 2003, Flynn et al. 2006, Grant et al. 2009). By establishing relationships and reputations as trustworthy, prosocially motivated employees elicit respect and reciprocity rather than envy and undermining from their colleagues.
A seocond mechanism explaining the performance benefits of prosocial motivation is working harder. In addition, when high self-esteem and self-efficacy put employees at risk for complacency, those who are prosocially motivated are more likely to maintain their effort and performance: They worry about letting others down if they fail and anticipate that others will be grateful if they succeed (Grant & Wrzesniewski 2010).
A fourth mechanism is working safer. During the COVID-19 pandemic, prosocially motivated individuals were more likely to follow physical distancing guidelines, stay home when sick, and buy face masks (Campos-Mercade et al. 2020). By leading individuals to consider the consequences for others who might be vulnerable, prosocial motivation can encourage caution and discourage risky decisions.

How do you elicit prosocial motivation?

1) get people in contact with the beneficiaries of their work / get people to understand task importance

Many employees hold jobs that have a positive impact on others but have little exposure to the ultimate beneficiaries of their work—the clients, customers, and end users who are affected by their tasks. Personalizing and humanizing one’s job by establishing contact with those who benefit from it can have surprising motivational effects. For example, in a field experiment (Grant et al. 2007), university fundraising callers were randomly assigned to have contact with a single undergraduate student whose scholarship was supported by their work. After meeting with the student for just 10 minutes, the average caller spent 142% more minutes on the phone and raised 171% more money, whereas callers in the control conditions did not change significantly on these measures.

These effects have been extended to internal beneficiaries inside the organization. In a field experiment (Bellé 2012), nurses assembled more surgical kits per minute—and made fewer errors— after they had been randomly assigned to meet the health care practitioners who would use the kits. These effects were partially mediated by prosocial motivation: Beneficiary contact increased their desire to perform a public service and make a difference. 

When direct beneficiary contact is not possible, task significance itself can drive performance: When employees are aware of the positive impact of their jobs on others, they work harder and safer. In a field experiment with lifeguards (Grant 2008c), reading stories about other lifeguards performing rescues increased the hours that lifeguards worked and increased supervisor ratings of helpfulness in protecting and assisting guests.


#ob-notes
#prosocial-motivation
#edge
#sledgehammer









# self distancing

Our ability to turn our attention inward to reflect on our circumstances allows us to learn from our mistakes, make sense of our experiences, plan, and engage in a host of other mental processes that contribute handedly to our ability to regulate our emotions, innovate, problem-solve, and create. But self-reflection does not always lead to positive outcomes. Particularly when people focus on negative experiences, self-reflection often backfires, leading them to get stuck in negative thought loops (i.e., worry and rumination), which undermine decision making, performance, health, and relationships. Considering these different findings together presents a paradox. 

On the one hand, ample evidence indicates that self-reflection can be adaptive, enhancing emotion regulation and providing new perspectives into difficult situations. On the other hand, self-reflection can also become a liability when it morphs into perseverative negative thinking.

To reduce anxiety and rumination and worry, "reflect from the balcony" when you consider negative events. 

One of the defining features of maladaptive self-reflection is its immersive and egocentric quality.
When people ruminate or worry about negative experiences, they get stuck focusing narrowly on
the aversive features of their experiences that pose a threat to themselves, which makes it difficult for them to see the bigger picture, where solutions to their problems often lie (Kross 2021).
Building from this observation, psychologists have speculated that facilitating adaptive reflection
requires a mechanism to help people psychologically distance from their experience so they can
step back from their immersed view of the situation to reflect on it more effectively.
Psychological distancing refers to the process of mentally moving away from what is experientially available in the here and now, which by default is embedded in the present egocentric
state of the self (for review, see Kross & Ayduk 2017). That is, whereas the default mode with
which people typically engage in self-reflection is embedded in a first-person, egocentric perspective, which elicits rumination and worry, distancing helps break people out of this narrow view,
allowing them to reconstrue negative experiences without becoming overwhelmed by negative
emotions.
A large amount of work links engaging in psychological distance (hereafter referred to as
distance or distancing) when people reflect on negative emotional experiences with adaptive psychological, physiological, and behavioral outcomes. This is true for different populations (e.g.,
children as well as adults, vulnerable groups), regardless of whether people distance spontaneously
or are directed to do so in the context of experiments and field interventions.
The role that distancing plays in enabling self-regulation has a long history in psychology (see
Kross & Ayduk 2017 for a similar historical overview). Mischel was one of the first to speculate
on the role that distancing plays in helping individuals grapple with intense emotions. He argued
that creating psychological distance from the desirable features of tempting treats via distraction
or abstraction allowed children to exert self-control in the classic delay-of-gratification paradigm
(aka the Marshmallow Test; e.g., Mischel & Rodriguez 1993). More recent work on construal level
theory has produced a large body of work consistent with Mischel’s claims by showing that more
abstract mindsets and goal construals tip people’s decision making in favor of prioritizing longover short-term goals (Fujita et al. 2006).
A similar insight is captured by Ury’s (1991) metaphor of “going to the balcony” in the context
of negotiations: When facing a particularly frustrating moment during a difficult negotiation, it
is helpful to adopt an attitude of a third-party observer watching the negotiation unfold from a
balcony overlooking a stage. Ury argues that going to the balcony allows people to see the needs
and goals of both sides more clearly and thus generates more mutually satisfactory solutions to
deadlocks.
In the clinical domain, Beck defined distancing as “the ability to view one’s own thoughts (or
beliefs) as constructions of ‘reality’ rather than as reality itself” (Alford & Beck 1998, p. 142) and
recognized it as an important preliminary step that clients achieve in order for cognitive therapy
to be successful. More recently, the closely related concepts of decentering—observing one’s
thoughts and emotions as passing mental events rather than direct readouts of an objective reality
(see Bernstein et al. 2015 for review)—and perspective-broadening appraisals—seeing the bigger
picture, recognizing that time heals all, and acknowledging the good with the bad (e.g., Schartau
et al. 2009)—have been shown to play a key role in facilitating healthy self-reflection in a variety
of contexts.
The specific role that distancing plays in facilitating adaptive self-reflection has been studied in
depth in the social-personality psychology domain (for review, see Kross & Ayduk 2017). In this
line of work, researchers manipulate and assess peoples’ tendency to adopt a distanced perspective
while reflecting on negative experiences and then measure an array of immediate and delayed outcomes. Across studies, researchers have linked the tendency to distance in this manner with lower
levels of emotional reactivity, assessed subjectively and implicitly using physiological and neural
measures. In this vein, a recent large-scale meta-analysis found that distancing was associated with
a medium effect size (Hedges’s g = 0.518) for reducing self-reported negative emotions (Moran
& Eyal 2022). The benefits associated with distancing are not, however, restricted to emotional
reactivity. Distancing has also been linked with reduced cognitive accessibility of negative affect,
intrusive ideation, and physiological stress reactions (e.g., blood pressure) relevant to physical
health outcomes (Kross & Ayduk 2017).
How does distancing lead to these beneficial outcomes? Although many techniques exist for
enhancing this psychological state, at a broad level, a common mechanism underlies their benefits:
They facilitate cognitive change, a process in which people reframe their negative experiences in
ways that reduce their aversive qualities. As we elaborate on in the next section, although the
specific form that such cognitive change takes may depend on both the type of distancing tactic
used and the nature of the situation one is trying to reframe, by allowing people to step back
from the emotional immediacy of the situation, distancing helps people change how they think
about their circumstances in ways that ultimately improve the way they feel about them rather
than leading them to simply relive the aversive feature of their negative experience over and over
again—the defining feature of maladaptive forms of self-reflection such as worry and rumination






#ob-notes
#self-distancing
#sledgehammer


























# be around people looking to expand the pie

At this point, I am so sick and tired of studies about "equality".

As any good intellectual, I try to steel-man an argument and take the most charitable view of any argument about a complicated issue.

However, I have come to realize that many complaints about "equality" are really resentments toward rich or successful people, but masquerading as a rigorous academic study.

So many of these people don't *truly* care about inequality; they just hate that certain people are better off and have more. It's all just envy and jealousy.

I care about equality of opportunity, but so many of these "studies" are fixated on equality of outcome - and the "outcome" is often defined subjectively and conveniently to paint certain "disadvantaged groups" as not having enough.

I'm done. I want to hear from people who want to grow the pie, rather than come up with an "equal" way to divide the pie.


#philsophy
#quote
#marginal-revolution
#anti-woke






























# more like covid never forget: progressives had bad policies

It's going to be fun to see absolutely no one of the globalists and progressives take responsibility for Europe's mass migration and destruction of the european society.

They don't take credit for inflation, for the disaster of covid lockdowns, and they won't take credit for the invasion.

They are like this



#covid
#never-forget
#anti-woke



















# quote

You do know that the stories going on in your head are not consistent with reality right?


#philosophy
#quote





























# Creswell 2017 “Mindfulness Interventions”

Mindfulness
- attending to one’s present experiences
- awareness of the present moment
++ present moment could include senstations, mental images, talk, sounds
++ accepting the present moment. curious. detached. nonreactive.

It influences…

Chronic pain
Immune system
Depression and anxiety
Addication
Sustained attention
Working memory performance
Accepting attitude
Greater perspective taking
Relationship satisfaction

In the workplace, it yields lower stress and greater job sat
- Good et al., 2016
- among soldiers Jha et al., 2020; Johnson et al., 2014




keywords
- undergraduate reading
- undergrads pull studies from this review and summarize
- mindfulness
- psych of performance



#mindfulness
#psych-of-performance
#undergrad-reading

























# Tomasello & Vaish 2013 “Origins of human cooperation”

A comparison of human vs non-human great ape cooperation
- e.g., female is responsible for 100% childcare in great apes
- in humans, female is responsible for ~ 50%

Humans became ultracooperative due to two evolutionary steps


(1) something happened in the environment to create interdependence

People had to become collaborative foragers.

The social selection then advantaged cooperators.

(2) as human groups grew, they faced between-group competition

Thus, they ramped up within-group cooperation.





keywords
- cooperation
- evolution of cooperation
- apes


#cooperation
#evolutionary-biology
#apes


























# Evidence for discrepancy model of self regulation

Students are asked to examine and learn material (e.g., vocab items).
Students spend more time studying items that are greater in difficulty (Dunlosky & Thiede, 1988; Metcalfe & Kornell, 2005).


keywords
- self regulation
- discrepancy


#self-regulation
#discrepancy































# Bjork, Dunlosky, & Kornel 2013 “Self-regulated learning: beliefs”

We live in a world where you have to learn on your own. What do people believe about learning? What do we know about self-regulated learning?

Institutions, such as colleges, tend to be concerned about whether incoming students possess background knowledge in certain important domains, such as English or mathematics, and tests are often administered to assess whether such knowledge has been ac- quired. Only rarely, though, are students tested for whether they have the learning skills and practices in place to take on the upcoming years of learning in an efficient, effective way.

Most students believe that re-reading is more effective than self-testing.
- McCabe 2011

We know that spacing is a good strategy, but even after going through an experiment participants believe that massed practice is better (Kornell, 2009).

Stability bias: students don’t realize that their knowledge of something will diminish over time.
- students also underestimate how much they can improve through studying

Students falsey believe that anything that is “fluent,” is understood
- if I read something that goes into my head easily…
- then I think I’ve learned it

Students believe that learning should be easy. They believe in learning styles. No support.

An effective learner is one who
- understands memory
- knows activities that enhance storage and retrieval
- monitors own state of learning
- understands biases

(1) understand memory, or the storage and retrieval process

Memory is not a permanent photograph.
We relate new information to what we already know.
Retrieval is cue dependent.

To be a sophisticated learner requires understanding that creating durable and flexible access to to-be-learned information is partly a matter of achieving a meaningful encoding of that information and partly a matter of exercising the retrieval process. On the encoding side, the goal is to achieve an encoding that is part of a broader framework of interrelated concepts and ideas. On the retrieval side, practicing the retrieval process is crucial.

(2) activities to enhance storage and retrieval

Spacing rather than massing
Vary the environmental conditions of learning
Testing and retesting
- best way to distinguish between what you know and don’t is to test
- tests produce as much learning as time spent studying without testing
Interleaving, or creating contextual interference (Lee, 2012)
Include errors or mistakes (Lee, 2012; Simon & Bjork, 2001; Rawson & Kintsch, 2005; Whitten & Bjork, 1977).
Elaborate on the to-be-learned material.

(3) Monitoring learning

Continual checks and decisions: what should be studied next and how should it be studied?
- identify whether you have actually learned





keywords
- learning
- psych of performance
- undergraduate reading


#lay-beliefs
#psych-of-performance
#undergrad-reading
#lay-beliefs-of-learning
#learning
#great-paper













# 16 lessons Chris Williamson 2022

1. Idiots all the way up

6-figure bosses don't know what they are doing.

Millionaires don't know what they are doing.

Billionaires don't know what they are doing. 



2. Don't conflate difficult with value

Things that are difficult to get are not necessarily valuable.

But valuable things are often difficult to attain. 

Valuable: fulfilling intellectually and spiritually. 

But do not chase things that are difficult just because they are difficult. Most smart people realize that there is value in stepping outside of their comfort zone and doing something that is difficult, but don't get carried away.

Non-valuable things slip into our desires by accident sometimes. Don't take your desires from other people. Don't take your desires from what the crowd announces to be worthwhile. 



3. Stop worrying so much about what other people think of you. Most people don't even like themselves. We would care far less about what others think of us if we realized how seldom they do. You boos mean nothing; I've seen what makes you cheer. 



4. People with low character will always find a way to be miserable. If people are determined to be offended, there is nothing you can do about it. 



5. Doing the thing despite being scared is bravery. Don't confuse bravery with the absense of fear. 



6. Discipline over motivation. Who cares if you want to do something. Who cares if you are in a flow state. Who cares if you feel great while acting. Motivation is dumb. Do the thing. Get it done. Discipline. 



7. Trying to think your way out of overthinking is like trying to sniff your way out of cocaine problem. Sometimes you need your mind to overcome body problems, and sometimes you need your body to overcome thinking problems. Go for a walk. Find an activity you can get lost in that is truly fun (dance, pickle-ball, mountain biking). 



8. Happiness comes down to the choice between the mental discomfort of becoming aware of your reflections or the discomfort of becoming ruled by them. 



9. You should always have a committed period of work dedicated to completing a small number of projects. Competent people let non-priorities slip away. During that time, you will by necessity become worse in some aspects of life. 



10. You don't become confident by shouting affirmations in the mirror but by having a stack of undeniable proof that you are who you say you are. Outwork your self-doubt. 



#grouped-ideas
#chris-williamson
#philosophy















 


#

Christopher theory:
so much conflation of verbal fluency with expertise/knowledge/worthwhile to talk to/worthy of a job. 


Christopher theory:
treat yourself like you are the coach and your body is the athlete. You wouldn't force perfection on a student, just what is necessary to move forward. 


scale:
- "how much others think about me" scale. Frequent feedback. Diversity stuff. Voice and safety and attributions. It ramps up the extent to which people believe others are thinking about them. And they over-state this belief. Make a scale. 



#christopher-thinking
#philosophy




















# My Creed

To live as gently as I can;
To be, no matter where, a man;
To take what comes of good or ill
And cling to faith and honor still;
To do my best, and let that stand
The record of my brain and hand;
And then, should failure come to me,
Still work and hope for victory.

To have no secret place wherein
I stoop unseen to shame or sin;
To be the same when I'm alone
As when my every deed is known;
To live undaunted, unafraid
Of any step that I have made;
To be without pretense or sham
Exactly what men think I am.

To leave some simple mark behind
To keep my having lived in mind;
If enmity to aught I show,
To be an honest, generous foe,
To play my little part, nor whine
That greater honors are not mine.
This, I believe, is all I need
For my philosophy and creed.

Edgar Albert Guest


#poem
#quote
#philosophy













# 

Rob Henderson: the goal of propaganda is to change what you think what other people think.
- that's what I'm after on individual differences. Which group is the most wrong about what other people think. 
- what i'm talking about: what it is like to navigate the world as a person of type X or Y. 




The effects of luxury beliefs at the workplace (it isn't holding the belief, it is signaling that you believe it via your rhetoric and social media behavior). 



# rob henderson

Alluent, high class people know how fluff their college essay writing to make it sound like they suffered serious disadvantages. 

Poor people who truly suffered something atrocious but got over it don't see it as a huge part of their self-concept. They don't ruminate on it. They've moved on. 

So, the people best at victim writing for college essays are not the people who suffered but the rich people who 



#rob-henderson
#philosophy
























# writing a review with lay beliefs


This strikes me as a great way to write a review article. For a given topic, identify what most people think works, then compare to what exists in the literature. 

(a) happiness

"By coding media articles on happiness, we first identified the most commonly recommended stragies" for increasing happiness. Then, we assessed whether these strategies have been tested. E.g., "the widely touted happiness benefits of engaging with nature have been demonstrated in only X studies..."

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-023-01651-4#ref-CR90 

(b) org selection techniques/myths

This paper isn't a review, but it isn't hard to imagine how the paper could be reformulated to become one. HR managers commonly believe X, Y, and Z about hiring. The number of studies (and their quality) in the lit on X, Y, and Z ...

https://www.uni-saarland.de/fileadmin/upload/lehrstuhl/koenig/PDFs-Publikationen/FisherEtAl_final.pdf


#lay-beliefs
#review
#grad-philosophy
#writing



















# Winne & Nesbit, 2010 “The psychology of academic achievement”


How do learners succeed or fail in school?


Short list of big effects
- testing
- spacing
- generation: learners produce answers compared to having them recognize
- organization: integrating and synthesizing information
- do not overload working memory
- students cannot reliably calibrate their comprehension or memory
- most students have trouble discovering important principles on their own
- to-be-learned material and skills must matter to the learner


The authors discuss meta cognition, achievement orientations, and interests in a way that doesn’t connect to students, but their discussion is a nice intro to the theories of each.

Class sizes of 15 or fewer reliably lead to greater learning.

Matching instruction to learner styles does not have reliable effects
- Coffield et al., 2004
- no relationship between styles and objective performance
++ Kratzig & Arbuthnott 2006





keywords
- learning
- psych of performance
- undergraduate reading


#learning
#psych-of-performance
#undergrad-reading
#testing-effect























# Burt, Kilduff, Tasselli, 2013 “Social Network Analysis”

Communication is more frequent and influential within than between groups such that people in the same group develop similar views. People tire of repeating arguments and stories explaining why they believe and behave the way they do. Within a group, people create systems of phrasing, opinions, symbols, and behaviors defining what it means to be a member. Much of what we know is not easily understood beyond the colleagues around us. When significant differences in understanding occur, they are more likely between people in separate clusters than between people in the same cluster.

People who connect across structural holes are presented with opportunities to coordinate people otherwise disconnected, which puts them in a position to derive ideas or resources from exposure to contacts who differ in opinion or practice.







keywords
- social network analysis
- social psychology networks


#norms
#networks
#communication

















# others are going to use this

The difference between

"user/cdishop/desktop/labfolder/file.txt"

and

"../file.txt"


The difference between

This is a really interesting write-up about Burrtzorg, the home healthcare company in the Netherlands that is very decentralized and apparently very successful at retaining employees https://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/this-company-lets-employees-take-charge-buurtzorg

and

Some interesting studies/ideas on team status hierarchies and performance:

Gray et al 2023 say UNSTABLE status hierarchies are needed for teams to perform well.

HOWEVER / BUT

Wolley et al. 2023 say STABLE status hierarchies are needed for teams to 
perform well.

Why the difference? Because one is referring to team roles/ranks/positions and the other is referring to beliefs about reputation. Gray et al. 2023: teams will perform well when members believe they can over time gain recognition by others on the team for contributing useful information (UNSTABLE status hierarchy: "I feel like I can over time gain status on this team by helping out"). Woolley et al: teams will perform well when positions are stable (STABLE status hierarchy: "I know my leader will be the same for the rest of this task, so I know how to coordinate").

So, you want people to perceive stable roles so they don't get confused about what to do, but you also want them to perceive instabilitly (e.g., "i feel like I can move up and acquire status in this domain") of reputation so they have incentive to contribute.

[link to documents]



[christopher writing]

Methods with others in mind

Other people are going to use my code
Other people are going to use my notes
I'm pointing to these articles because I think they will be relevant to others
The whole point of a team is the whole to be greater than the sum of the parts. Do something for me so we can save one another time. 



#christopher-thinking
#christopher-theory
#big-ideas
#best-ideas
#great-paper
#methods-with-others
#anita

































# Van de Calseyde archiv “Taking a disagreeing perspective improves the accuracy of people’s “


The wisdom of the “inner crowd.” Ask someone to estimate a quantity. Then ask them to take the perspective of someone who disagrees with them. Predict again.

Questions people were asked:
- What is the weight of a sumo wrestler?
- What is the weight of the liberty bell?
- What is the weight of a washing machine?





keywords
- wisdom of crowds
- prediction errors

#wisdom-of-crowds
#prediction-errors




















# Yanai & Lercher, 2019 “What is the question”


The single greatest misunderstanding about science by the public is that scientists solve problems; in reality, scientists are primarily concerned with creating them.

Many fields pose “big questions,” but those lists are rarely helpful. A good scientist pursues his own puzzles, which may only be interesting to him.
- big questions are so general as to be useless

Scientists tend to believe in the brick wall accumulation of knowledge principle: your paper is adding a new brick to an already established wall. Or is filling in a gap in the wall.
- no, we are in the business of tearing down walls




keywords
- philosophy of science
- most of your time as a scientist is trying to find a question


#phil-of-science
#science-of-science
#great-paper



















# Yanai & Lercher, 2020 “Selective attention in hypothesis driven data”

Put a gorilla in the data set. Ask some students to test hypotheses. Ask the others to “examine the data…what conclusions can you draw?”

The hypothesis-free students were 5 times as likely to notice the gorilla.

If these findings are representative also of scientific research as a whole, they warrant concern about the current emphasis on hypothesis-driven research, especially in the context of information-rich datasets




https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-020-02133-w


keywords
- undergraduate reading
- methods
- philosophy of science
- programming
- gorilla in data set



#gorilla-experiment
#undergrad-reading
#phil-of-science
#stats

































# AI tools

Take advantage of the AI Revolution. Here are the top AI tools guaranteed to enhance your productivity and transform your work.

Audio and Video AI Tools:
-------------------------
1. VoicePen AI:Convert audio content into blog posts, using AI.
https://voicepen.ai

2. Krisp: AI tool for removing background voices, noises, and echo from calls.
https://krisp.ai/

3. Beatoven: AI tool for creating custom royalty-free music.
https://www.beatoven.ai/

4. Cleanvoice: AI tool for automatically editing podcast episodes.
https://cleanvoice.ai/

5. Podcastle: AI tool for studio-quality recording from your computer.
https://podcastle.ai/

6. Vidyo: AI tool for making short-form videos from long-form content.
https://vidyo.ai/

7. Maverick: AI tool for generating personalized videos at scale.
https://lnkd.in/eptCVijb

8. Soundraw: AI tool for creating original music.
https://soundraw.io/

9. Otter: AI tool for capturing and sharing insights from meetings.
https://otter.ai/

Design AI Tools:
-------------------
1. Flair: AI tool for designing branded content.
https://flair.ai/

2. Illustroke: AI tool for creating vector images from text prompts.
https://illustroke.com/

3. Patterned: AI tool for generating patterns for design.
https://www.patterned.ai/

4. Stockimg: AI tool for generating the perfect stock photo.
https://stockimg.ai/

5. Looka: AI tool for designing your brand.
https://looka.com/

Copy and Content AI Tools:
---------------------------
1. Copy: AI tool for generating copy that increases conversions.
https://www.copy.ai/

2. CopyMonkey: AI tool for creating Amazon listings in seconds.
http://copymonkey.ai/

3. Ocoya: AI tool for creating and scheduling social media content.
https://www.ocoya.com/

4. Unbounce Smart Copy: AI tool for writing high-performing cold emails at scale.
https://unbounce.com/

5. Puzzle: AI tool for building a knowledge base for your team and customers.
https://www.puzzlelabs.ai/

Image and Content Clean-up AI Tools:
-------------------------------
1. Civitai:Civitai is the only Model-sharing hub for the AI art generation community!
https://civitai.com

2. Cleanup: AI tool for removing objects, defects, people, or text from pictures.
https://cleanup.pictures/

3. Inkforall: AI tool for content generation, optimization, and performance.
https://inkforall.com/

4. Thundercontent: AI tool for generating content.
https://lnkd.in/djFxMZsZ

AI Database:
-------------- #community #ai #ai #love #database #database #database

1. SyntheticAIdata : https://lnkd.in/efKXxUkU
2. theresanaiforthat : https://lnkd.in/esexMFzt
This post is inspired by Sunil 's post.



#ai-tools
#best-ideas-list
#tools























# Landers et al "The greatest battle is within ourselves




Competition increases performance.

Cool paragraph on the effects of competition.







keywords

- self regulation

- motivation

- psych of performance

- collective performance

- undergraduate reading



#competition
#collective-action
#collective-performance
#motivation

















# Kuncel et al. "Academic performance, career potential, creativity, and job performance"

Cognitive ability predicts performance in and out of school.




keywords

- cognitive ability

- intelligence

- psych of performance

- SAT ACT

- g





#intelligence
#sat-act
#psych-of-performance























# The Man In The Glass 
Peter Dale Wimbrow Sr.  
 	
When you get what you want in your struggle for self
And the world makes you king for a day
Just go to the mirror and look at yourself
And see what that man has to say.

For it isn’t your father, or mother, or wife
Whose judgment upon you must pass
The fellow whose verdict counts most in your life
Is the one staring back from the glass.

He’s the fellow to please – never mind all the rest
For he’s with you, clear to the end
And you’ve passed your most difficult, dangerous test
If the man in the glass is your friend.

You may fool the whole world down the pathway of years
And get pats on the back as you pass
But your final reward will be heartache and tears
If you’ve cheated the man in the glass.


#poem
#quote
#philosophy























# randomness does exist in the world

from the first page of a operations research textbook:

Random phenomena are common in natural as well as man-made systems. Weather is a natural random phenomenon, while the stock market is a man-made random phenomenon. Study of such random phenomena is vital if we are to understand their behavior, and predict (and possibly control) their future. 


#dissertation
#christopher-dissertation
#randomness
#stochastic-processes












# Kuncel et al. "The truth about the SAT and ACT"

Myth 1: tests only predict first year performance

Myth 2: tests are not related to success in the real world

Myth 3: beyond a certain point, higher scores don't matter

Myth 4: test alternatives are more useful than SAT or ACT

Myth 5: tests are just measures of social class

Myth 6: test prep and coaching produce large gains




keywords

- psych of performance

- cognitive ability

- undergraduate reading

- undergraduate writing

- g

- intelligence



#intelligence
#lay-beliefs
#sat-act















































# inner confidence in chess player

In a world abounding in mindless braggadocio and dopamine-driven look-at-me-now social media narcissism, this special Ding moment is a reminder that it is the inner core that matters, not perceptions, appearances, and imaginary constructs about strength. 

https://twitter.com/olimpiuurcan/status/1647820206239256576?s=46&t=MIarVf5OKa1ot0qVjXkPLg

#quote
#philosophy

















# oswald


# psych of performance

8ish to 10ish

Also, "give kids incentives to perform...well, they don't know what to do with that." 9:45ish

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RL1peNBAnns


# research ideas

how learning from errors at the individual level differs from learning from errors at the team level
- Homologies of learning from errors at the individual and team level














# marginal revolution: housing market chaos occurs people because are foolish


The housing market is going under because people are foolish/dumb/stupid...because they do not understand the true nature of housing markets. 

"we posit a further cause of the housing shortage: public misunderstanding of housing
markets."

Their study
- Describe basic economic theory on housing markets
- Ask people questions about housing market dynamics
- People are completely wrong
- Show that people are wrong irrespective of question wording or vignette choice

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4266459



[christopher thinking / research]

Apply the same thing to OB: folk misguided ideas about employee practices

Where else does this effect apply?
Youtube and advice:
- people falsely believe that youtube gurus (advice on dating) are popular because what they say is true. "They would not get popular if their claims were false." 
- No, the above idea is wrong. Youtube gurus go viral based on whether the person is attractive. 



#next-study
#research-idea
#economics
#marginal-revolution
#folk-wisdom
#lay-theories


















# williamson summary

0:00: 🤔 Humans struggle with moderation due to our evolutionary history of scarcity and our current abundance of resources.

5:54: 💰 Slot machines are designed to be effective by using the scarcity loop, which includes opportunity, unpredictable rewards, and quick repeatability.

11:17: 🎰 Pigeons prefer unpredictable rewards over predictable rewards, which may be due to our evolutionary need to search for food.

16:49: 🎰 Companies are using casino-like features in advertising and online shopping to increase conversion rates.

22:29: 🌍 The production and supply of the drug Captagon in the Middle East is primarily sourced from Syria, with government labs producing more than legal exports.

28:47: 💊 The line between compulsion, dependency, and addiction becomes blurred when using substances or stimuli as a solution to problems.

34:30: 🎥 The video discusses the emergence of countercultural movements and predicts the rise of opposing movements in the near future.

39:58: 💡 Humans crave status and influence, and social media has allowed individuals to have a greater influence on a larger scale.

45:24: 🚩 The shift from judging people by their actions to judging them by their opinions has given words more weight than actions, leading to performative empathy and suspicion about the authenticity of people's deeds.

50:39: 📈 Politicians' tweets in the United States have become more toxic over the past decade, as they chase after likes and retweets.

56:00: 🎓 The focus of going to university should be on learning and personal growth, not just grades.

#chris-williamson
#philosophy




























# Oswald 2019 “Measuring and modeling cognitive ability”

Good info on g, or intelligence

g is the best predictor of task performance we know of.
- it also predicts student achievement
- and subsequent career success, even four decades later

positive manifold
- those who score higher on one specific ability measure tend to score higher on other ability measures (verbal, mathematical, spatial, and other)

g tells you about someone’s current and future likelihood of addressing complex tasks effectively and efficiently in school, work, and life.

What it doesn’t tell you
- how to develop specific ability tests
- how to train people for a specific ability
- how to select someone for their specific expertise
- how ability develops





keywords
- psych of performance
- intelligence
- g
- cognitive ability



#intelligence
#psych-of-performance




































# Heckman, 2006

Rate of return on human capital investments are huge during preschool but small beyond age 22.

“We overinvest in post-schooling programs and under-invest in preschool programs.”


Core developmental psychology insights:
- the architecture of the brain and the processes of skill formation are influenced by an interaction between genetics and environment
- later mastery of skills depends on a foundation laid down in youth
- there are sensitive periods in development in which a brain is more plastic
- early learning helps you feel confident and motivated to learn more
- early learning makes learning at later periods more efficient




keywords
- development
- IO philosophy
- training in the context of overall development
- IO interventions are nothing compared to presschool interventions


#school
#economics
#human-capital-investments
#intervention-timing





































# Braun et al., 2020 “Exploring the dynamic team cohesion…”

Cohesion and coordination relate to subsequent team performance. Team performance then relates to subsequent cohesion.

keywords
- reciprocal relationships
- cohesion

#cohesion
#coordination
#team-performance


















# Mierlo & Van Hooft


Team goals relate to performance (field hockey).
- approach (we want to do X) relates positively
- avoid (we want to avoid X) relates negatively

Referent shift discussion.

keywords
- undergraduate reading
- motivation
- self regulation
- goals



#goals
#motivation
#undergrad-reading

























# Acton, Braun, & Foti, 2020 “Built for unity: assessing the impact”

Growth curve (initial and change) modeling of composition and cohesion trajectories.

e.g., teams with higher mean levels of extraversion will have higher initial levels of cohesion.

e.g., teams with higher mean levels of agreeableness will have greater increases in social cohesion over time




keywords
- growth modeling
- composition
- cohesion


#cohesion
#composition












# Ozkok et al., 2019 “Modeling measurement as a sequential process”

No README file in supplementary material.

research idea
- no README files
- impossible to mimic




























# Hambrick, Macnamara, & Oswald, 2020 “Is the deliberate practice view defensible?”

Two things that Ericsson gets right:
- expertise is acquired gradually
- training can improve expertise


Within vs between:
- do interindividual (between person) differences in accumulated training explain interindividual differences in expertise?
- it is a given that training increases expertise within individuals. But this fact is not relevant for the between person question (see Figure 1. awesome).




Some issues
- deliberate practice has no agreed upon definition
- “something where you deliberately try to improve performance.”
- studies (Gobet & Campitelli 2007) find huge variability in the amount of deliberate practice time it takes to become an expert
- deliberate pratice accounts for ~30% of the variance in expertise…which certaintly isn’t all of it.
- deliberate practice leaves more variability unexplained than it does explained
- among elite atheletes, deliberate practice explained almost nothing (Macnamara et al., 2016).
- in sum, DP explains performance, but not all of it (like Ericcson stated).


What explains expertise beyond DP?

(1) developmental factors

Is it better to start your specific sport at age 6 rather than 16? No

Elite sports performance is associated with diverse activities in adolescence. Elite atheletes, on average, accumulate fewer hours of organized training/practice in their main sport up to age 18.


(2) Experiential factors

It isn’t clear that DP gets you more than other activities such as work and play.




(3) Ability factors

Cognitive ability is huge. (Burgoyne et al., 2019). G people can learn faster.


(4) genetic and environment

some aspect of expertise is heritable







keywords
- deliberate practice
- psych of performance
- g
- expertise


#deliberate-practice
#intelligence
#expertise









# venezuela song



Usted piensa que yo voy a rogarle para que me quiera
Se cree importante del mundo la dueña
No más porque tiene lo que a mí me falta
Pero se olvida que todo no es la plata
Que el mundo está lleno de cosas pasajeras
Y ese fue su error y el orgullo la mata
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Que la nobleza que nace del alma
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Ay! no hay riqueza más grande en la vida
Que la nobleza que nace del alma
Pueda ser que un día cualquiera no esté arrepentida
Cuando los años la tengan vencida
Teniendo todo y le falte el amor
Pueda ser que no me toque sangrar más su herida
Porque es muy triste sentirse en la vida
Culpable de ocasionar un dolor
Yo mucho la quiero y con desdén me mira
Pero me resigno soy buen perdedor
Yo mucho la quiero y con desdén me mira
Pero me resigno soy buen perdedor
Usted piensa que yo porque soy pobre no tengo derecho
A sentir amor dentro de mi pecho
Pero también tengo lo que a usted le falta
Un corazón lleno de noble sentimiento
Es querendón pero qué va no entiende de eso
Si analiza y pienso que nació sin alma
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Rodando se miran las cosas más altas
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Vea que Dios tarda pero nunca olvida
Y rodando se miran las cosas más altas
Pueda ser que un día cualquiera no esté arrepentida
Que busque flores y sólo halle espinas
En el preciado jardín del amor
Pueda ser que no le toque buscar lo que hoy tira
Como si fuera un objeto se olvida
Que soy humano y tengo corazón
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción
Usted con dinero compre cosas lindas
Que yo gano aplausos con una canción. por Hildy





You think I'm going to beg you to love me
The owner is believed to be important in the world
No more because it has what I lack
But you forget that everything is not money
That the world is full of fleeting things
And that was her mistake and pride kills her
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
That the nobility that is born from the soul
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
Oh! there is no greater wealth in life
That the nobility that is born from the soul
It may be that one day you will not be sorry
When the years have defeated her
Having everything and lacking love
It may be that I don't have to bleed his wound anymore
Because it is very sad to feel in life
Guilty of causing pain
I love her very much and with disdain she looks at me
But I resign myself I'm a good loser
I love her very much and she looks at me with disdain
But I resign myself I'm a good loser
You think that because I am poor I have no right
To feel love inside my chest
But I also have what you lack
A heart full of noble feeling
It's loving but what's up, he doesn't understand that
If he analyzes and I think he was born without a soul
See that God takes but never forgets
See that God takes but never forgets
Rolling you look at the highest things
See that God takes but never forgets
See that God takes but never forgets
And rolling you look at the highest things
It may be that one day you will not be sorry
Look for flowers and only find thorns
In the precious garden of love
It may be that it is not your turn to look for what you throw away today
as if it were an object is forgotten
That I am human and I have a heart
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song
You buy nice things with money
That I win applause with a song. by hildy




el mundo está lleno de cosas pasajeras

the world is full of fleeting things


no hay riqueza más grande en la vida

there is no greater wealth in life
[there are no bigger riches in life]



Que la nobleza que nace del alma

That the nobility that is born [comes] from the soul








sabrosa (yummy, tasty)
divina

estamos a la orden







#venezuela-song
#divina
#sombrosa
#staring-ceiling





















# Henderson et al., 2020

OCB scale
- discretionary behavior that promotes the effective functioning of the organization

OCBI
- i helepd others with heavy workloads
- i assisted my supervisor with his/her work
- i took a personal interest in other employees

OCBO
- my attendance at work was above the norm
- i gave advance notice when I was unable to come to work
- i conserved and protected organizational property




keywords
- measurement
- OCB



#ocb
#measurement
#ocb-measure

























# Dormann & Griffin, 2015

Optimal time lags for panel designs…but their recommendations are weak

Estimate a model with shorter time lags than you expect
Consider third variables
Randomly select a subsample to test various time points
Account for measurement error


keywords
- time lags
- dynamics
- lag length



#time-lags
#panel-model











# escalation of commitment from career-degree (economic multi level) point of view



Escalation of commitment but with payment made to college degree. I feel pressured to go into the career field I paid for. 

Recruitment/selection committees can take advantage of this...
- make it clear that X degree is not necessary. Just the skills. 


What is my theoretical contribution?
- a multi level account: the effect of the economy. 
- sleesman (2012 MA was individual level)
- sleesman 2018 review said we need more contextual and situational accounts. He did not mention the economy, yet recent work by emory girl suggests that this is crazy important for how new career entry people make decisions. 
++ in economic upswings, people do not exhibit degree-career commitment. 
++ in economic downswings, people exhibit degree-career commitment



Why does escalation of commitment occur?
- sunk cost beliefs: we feel the need to follow through with something once we've invested time/money into it
- discount evidence telling us we should stop
- self-justification and face-saving: we don't want to admit our course of action was improper
- action/inaction effect (feldman & wong "when action-inaction"): when something went wrong in the past, we feel action is needed. 

According to management/OB authors, sunk cost mechanisms include
- self justification theory
- self presentation theory
- prospect theory
- https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/10.5465/AMBPP.2022.12266abstract


Sunk cost; that is the real thing I'm examining with my student questions about degrees.
Next step: ask students if they would be more attractive to orgs that offered "we don't care about your degree"



#next-study
#pg-sunk-cost-degree
#aom-submission
#next-aom





 






#christopher's theories / grouped ideas

Peterson alienating speaking with someone who only talks in cliches and bumper stickers

Gold et al., 2019 “Musical reward prediction errors engage … “ Prediction errors are crucial for perception, learning, and adaptability. Can they also explain the abstract pleasures we derive from seemingly nonadaptive behaviors?

Chris Williamson talking to psychologist: a joke is funny because we break people's mental models. Misdirect.

Breaking prediction errors is a fundamental idea. You need it for pleasure. You need it for learning (prediction errors learning paper). Trigger warnings and safe spaces are the opposite of breaking prediction errors. They are boring, and you don't learn anything.


I should write a paper about this. Thinking about prediction errors. A useful idea for organizational behavior. Learning. Pleasure. Adaptability. Etc. 


 

#edge
#grouped-ideas
#write-review-paper
#christopher-thinking


































# Heckman & Moktan, 2020

Economics has a “publish in top 5” or perish paradigm as well.

T5 publications have a huge effect on transition to tenure. Pursuit of T5 has become an obsession. Publishing in T5 is the most effective means of improving one’s chances of obtaining tenure in all of the top 35 US economics departments. Influential publications, however, appear in non-T5 outlets.

Journals tend to publish work by authors who are connected with the journal’s editors. Editors are likely to select the papers of those they know.

Many highly cited articles are not published in T5…you could even say that most are not published there.

Highly ranked scholars (in economics) are putting fewer of their papers in T5 journals.

Most authors who review for T5 outlets don’t cite T5 papers when they write their papers.

Page 462 is a great overview. This structure invites people to appeal to the tastes of the status quo and of the editors. The current practice has weak empirical support if judged by its ability to produce papers that last in terms of citation counts.

The appropriate solution to the problem will require a significant shift from the current publications-based system of deciding tenure to a system that emphasizes departmental peer review of a candidate’s work. Closely reading published and unpublished papers rather than counting placements of publications.







keywords
- T5 in economics
- publish or perish
- tyranny of metrics


#economics
#tyranny-of-metrics
#publish-or-perish
#a-pubs

























# Angus, 2018 “Problemistic search distance”

When your first app performs poorly, how different should your second app be? Only at extremely low levels of first app performance is it beneficial for developers to make second apps that are very different from their first apps.

Problemistic search literature:
- poor performance triggers search distance

As an organization’s past performance increases, nonlocal search of great distance becomes harmful.




keywords
- organizational performance
- psych of performance
- rugged landscapes

#psych-of-performance
#organizational-learning
#exploitation-exploration
#strategy
































# Ock & Oswald, 2018 “The utility of personnel selection decisions”

Simulation showing the tradeoff between a compensatory vs multiple-hurdle selection system.

compensatory
- select based on a composite score of multiple predictors
- standardize each predictor, then add up to create a unit weighted composite
- higher scores on one predictor will compensate for low scores on another

multiple hurdle
- administer one test to massive pool of applicants
- those who pass the cutoff take additional, more time consuming or expensive, tests.
- efficient, but less reliable
- creates direct range restriction


simulation but not at all easy to mimic


keywords
- monte carlo
- selection
- agent based model


#monte-carlo
#selection
#selection-systems

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





# Tannenbaum what really matters for teamwork?

Online talk
https://leadx.org/the-science-of-teamwork-scott-tannenbaum-webinar-replay/


1) organizations use teams now more than ever

time spent in collaborative activities has ballooned 50% or more
- Cross et al., 2016

Deloitte study (2016) of 7000+ orgs reveals move toward more team-based designs

In 70% of companies, over half of work is done in teams (Brandon Hall, 2020).




2) many teams are sub-optimal

92% view teams as critical, but only 23% view own team as effective (Davie, 2013)

The intensity of an experience increases when shared. Losing as a team is worse than loosing alone. Winning as a team is better than winning alone.
- Boothby et al., 2014




3) teams with greater teamwork perform better

Teams with better teamwork are 25% more likely to succeed
- LePine et al., 2008

Teams that don’t perform well are a prime source of error (Institute of Medicine, 1999)


4) stupid socializing things don’t make your team better

Going to a picnic does not
- reduce role ambiguity
- resolve competing priorities
- resolve unsufficient talent




5) teamwork is not at the cost of individual performance

50% of top collaborators were rated as top individual performers
- Cross et al., 2016

Largest predictor of whether you made it through special forces training was whether or not you viewed yourself as a team player.
- Gayton & Kehoe, 2015




6) don’t form teams when they are not needed

You have to deploy teams for the right reasons.




7) Capability (knowledge, skills, abilities, personality)

Individual competence matters. Hard to overcome big talent gaps.
- Stewart, 2006
- Aguinis & O’Boyle, 2014

But simply adding stars won’t always boost performance.
- Swaab et al., 2014

Star financial analysts decline in performance when they change companies.
- Groysberg & Lee, 2008
- Groysberg, Lee, and Nanda, 2008

Narcissists spread there bad attitudes to others (Dezecache et al., 2013) but they themselves don’t catch the positive attitudes from others (Czarna et al., 2014).

Don’t deal with narcissists, psychopaths, or machievallanists.
- they demonstrate worse workplace behaviors
- O’Boyle 2014


8) Cooperative attitudes about the team matter

Collective efficacy (believe that our team will be successful).
- predicts team performance (Gully et al., 2002)
- particularly so when teams are interdependent (Katz-Navon 2005)
- So, make sure you are discussing and celebrating wins

Psych safety
- confident that the team will not embarrass, reject, or punish someone for speaking up (Edmonson, 1999)
- without psych safety, you don’t get feedback seeking, asking questions, or requesting help…which are huge for team performance.
- you develop psych safety from peer support, leader support, and role clarity.


Teams with higher psych safety have higher engagement, satisfaction, commitment, info sharing, OCBs, and performance
- Frazier et al., 2016

Number one predictor of team performance at google was psychological safety. Being able to speak up about issues.




9) communication/info sharing is huge for teams

You need to share quality information and unique information. Don’t think that simply talking counts as info exchange.
- Marlow et al., 2018
- Mesmer-Magnus & DeChurch, 2009

High performing teams often communicate less than low performing teams. Communication matters — but it isn’t about talking more. It is about ensuring that the quality of info is useful.

Debriefs are very important.
- discuss what is working and not working
- reflect on how things are going
- do so not only after bad experiences
- discuss teamwork and not just task work
- they surface your strengths and weaknesses
- teams that do so outperform other teams
++ Tannenbaum & Cerasoli, 2013
++ Keiser & Arthur, 2020
++ Smith-Jentsch, Cannon-Bowers, Tannenbaum, & Salas, 2008


10) cognitions/shared understanding is huge for teams

Teams with shared mental models perform better
- DeChurch & Mesmer-Magnus, 2010

Your team should be on the same page with…
- what are the priorities?
- who is responsible for doing x?
- what should the team do if Z challenge emerges?




11) conditions/culture and resources are huge for teams

If leaders demonstrate cooperative, positive behaviors, then it signals to workers that this is a place of functioning.
- Raes et al., 2012







keywords
- teamwork
- psych of performance
- team effectiveness


#teamwork
#team-effectiveness
#psych-of-performance























# antifragile nick talib

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dq1rcdEds5Q

#edge
#antifragile
#christopher-thinking























# Schulz, Rollwage, Dolan, & Fleming, 2020 “Dogmatism manifests in lowered information search”

People higher in dogmatism don’t seek out information.

U shaped relationship between political orientation and dogmatism/belief that your political party is superior.

keywords
- political polarization
- information search
- curvilinear relationship



#dogmatism
#political-psych
#exploration-exploitation
#information-search
















# Eronen & Romeijn, 2020 “Philosophy of science and the formalization of psychological theory”

A discussion of “formalizing” theory across the sciences.

Psych theories are typically verbal and vague, and do not lead to precise predictions (Meehl, 1978, 1990).
- when you formalize, then assumptions and empirical implications become transparent


Two key ideas about math that revolutionized science:
- math is a means to capture not only how the world appears, but how the world is.
- math connects theory to observed data


The key point:
- before we get to math, we have to agree on our definitions of concepts
- everything in psychology is abstract, so take an iterative process. Imperfect definition, math and measure, new insights. New definition. New math and measure. etc.


keywords
- math is good for psych



#formal-models
#phil-of-science
#phil-of-modeling




































# Ehrenberg 1990 “The incentive effects of tournaments…”

Golf player performance varies with the toal money awarded in golf tournaments.

Higher prize differentials for winning are correlated with player performance.
- negative because in golf you want a low score

So, when prize money is high, your performance is better (assuming a tournament structure).


keywords
- performance
- psych of performance
- incentives
- tournaments


#incentives
#economics
#tournaments
#psych-of-performance























# Flora 2020 “Your coefficient alpha is probably wrong, but which coefficient omega”

A discussion of coefficient alpha and omega.

Measurement error produces biased estimates, but many report only coefficient alpha, a coefficient that is unrealistic and provides misleading interpretations.

(a) what is reliability?

A quantification of measurement precision.
The signal to noise ratio.
Proportion of total true score variance over total observed variance.

True scores are unobserved, so the direct quantity of reliability cannot be calculated directly. This has led to the development of various approaches to estimate reliability, most prominently coefficient alpha.
- see Revell & Condon, 2019 for a review relating composite reliability, test-retest reliability, and interrateer reliability to this formal variance-ratio definition

Parameter estimates of facator-analytic models lead to reliability estimates representing how precisely test scores measure target constructs.
- a one factor model can test the item response data of a unidimensional test
- poor fit of a one-factor model is evidence of multidimensionality

A reliability estimate should estimate how well an observed test score measures a target construct, which does not necessarily correspond to how well the score captures replicable variation.

(b) CFA

A score on an item (x1) is a dependent variable regressed on the factor (f) as a single independent variable with a slope coefficient (lambda1) and error (e1). Because scores on the factor (f) are unobserved, the factor-loading parameters cannot be estimated with the usual ordinary least squares method for linear regression. Instead, the factor loadings (and other model parameters) are estimated as a function of a covariance (or correlation) matrix among the observed item scores.

(c) using CFA for reliability

Because factor loadings quantify the strength of association between an item and a factor, the extent to which a set of items (as represented by their total score) reliably measures the factor is a function of the items’ factor loadings. Therefore, the reliability of the total score on a unidimensional test can be estimated from parameter estimates of a one-factor model fitted to the item scores.
- this is coefficient omega

Coefficient alpha is the same thing but you have to assume that all factor loadings across items are equivalent (essential tau equivalence). C alpha is an estimate of the total-score reliability for the measurement of a single construct common to all items in a test under the conditions that (1) the one-factor model is correct, (b) the factor loadings are equal across all items, and (c) the errors are independent across items.
- assumption 2 is pretty strict, so use omega

(d) example

5 items measuring oppenness (2,800 participants). Each item has a 6-point, likert response scale. Make sure you always have at least 5 likert options when using this method.

Reverse score items 02 and 05. Then, we’ll test the factor structure to determine an appropriate reliability estimate.

library(lavaan)

Fit a one-factor model to the data for the five openness items using direct ML estimation to incorporate cases with incomplete data.

mod1 <- openness =~ 01 + 02 + 03 + 04 + 05
fit1 <- cfa(mod1, data = open, std.lv=T, missing = “direct”,
estimator = “MLR”)

the std.lv option scales the factor by fixing its variance to 1. All fator loadings are free parameters (I would have labeled them).

summary(fit1, fit.measures = T)

The fit measures (CFI, RMSEA, TLI) cast doubt on the suitability of the one-factor model. Nonetheless, I examine the factor-loading estimates and calculate omega for illustrative purposes.

The factor loadings across the items vary substantially, which suggests that omega is more appropriate than alpha.

library(semTools)
reliability(fit1)

which will produce omega estimates. Omega is 0.61, which represents the proportion of total-score variance that is due to a single factor…that is, how reliably a total score for these five item measures an oppenness commmon factor.

You can get confidence intervals with

library(MBESS)
ci.reliability(data = open,
type = “omega”,
interval.type = “perc”)

Goes on to show how to estimate stuff for items with 4 or fewer likert options or multidimensional scales.







keywords
- reliability
- cfa
- alpha
- omega


#coeffient-alpha
#reliability





















# humor

0) for every situation, "your honor"

"Your honor I didn't realize..."


a) give stuff tags

"no, I am not on tik tok. That shit is retard juice."

"Just don't answer your phone and the IRS will stop calling. That's white trash meta knowledge."

"I kept calling and leaving voicemails of me singing. Mental warfare baby."

"There were many story lines happening at once with the women I was dating. Welcome to the multiverse of thots."

mental warfare
retard juice
white trash meta knoweldge
multiverse of thots

you're a glorified hall monitor
ever since ronies (corona virus) you've been different




b) call people out by describing their basic functions

[debt collector calls matt and pretends to be a lawyer]
Dude you are not a lawyer.
You are a dude in a cubicle drinking monster energy. You are a telemarketer. Stop flexing bro. You are not high class. 




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8OG-7SF2n4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5G3rlP41t6I


c)

he weighed only 110 pounds, but ten of those pounds came from his magic stick. 



d) add people to your stories



what speech would you give the philis to pump them up before the baseball game?

dudes, bring it in. bring it in. 
hey,
hey everyone
come in
let's go boys stop fucking around
alright, now I know we aren't doing well
Juan take your headphones off
Juan take your headphones off
I'm not yelling. No, I didn't raise my voice. 
Well if you'd let me finish and shut the fuck up. 



#humor
#mssp

















# lay audiences can catch bullshit

youtube commenters can catch the OB management bullshit

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-C6XIres43M


what predicts whether the commenters catch the bullshit?
transcript of the exchange
positivity or negativity of the comments


same with woman who spoke with chris williamson
the viewers caught the bullshit


#ob-notes
#people-are-smart
#bullshit
#catching-nonsense














# if something goes wrong, keep your sanity by asking yourself this question...

"did I have good intentions"?

#staring-ceiling





















# woke statements are boring


"the points you are going for are just casino tokens. Your point is meaningless. You are collecting virtue points of nothing."

the new arms race is how many victim buttons can I put on my outfit. 


#anti-woke
#staring-ceiling
#quote






# tell more people that you appreciate them

#quote
#social-animal











# louis CK

Comedy is suppossed to be a break from polite talk. There is suppossed to be no moral arrow.
"In my country, I could get out of the car and kill this woman."
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTJXdmJ5cWQ
51:55

Don't let anybody -- especially a producer -- get between you and the form of the joke you know is perfect. 


Every great bit started as a "nobody wants to hear that" joke. 


https://www.youtube.com/shorts/6E2ab_mxC5o


the real truth is in little moments


I try to capture those little moments about how people behave, then you build some bullshit story around it to make a film.


#podcast
#quote
#staring-ceiling













# letters of friendship

"Dear Thomas,

Your letter of the 28th August gave me great pleasure; I thank you for the affectionate expressions it contains. It is a long time since I have heard from you, but your letters are always welcome, and the knowledge that I am remembered with kindness by those with whom I was once intimately associated, is to me a source of much satisfaction.

Your sincere friend,
Abraham Lincoln"


"My very dear Friend,

It is with a heart full of gratitude and love that I acknowledge the receipt of your letter. I was beginning to fear that our correspondence would cease entirely, and that the cares and anxieties of life had so engrossed your mind as to leave no room for the recollection of your absent friend. But now that I hear from you again, I feel that I have a hold on that which is dearer to me than any worldly possessions.

Believe me, ever your attached friend,
Elizabeth Barrett Browning"


[statements]
The knowledge that I am remembered with kindness by those with whom I was once intimately associated is to me a source of much satisfaction.
I feared that the anxieties of life had so engrossed your mind as to leave no room for the recollection of your absent friend. 




#philosophy
#quote
#letters


















# christopher lee advice: don't become a star before you become an expert

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lHrSDjDd5bA

People who only want to be rich and famous is extremely dangerous. The worst thing someone can do is believe their own publicity. 

You need something behind you. Experience. Versatility. Innovative ability. A creative engine. 

If all you can do is play the same part, then you will be forgotten quickly.

#quote
#podcast



























# Baron & Henry, 2010 “How entrepreneurs acquire the capacity to excel”

A discussion of deliberate practice applied to the business world.


Deliberate practice (intense, focused efforts to improve) not only helps you perform, it enhances your cognitive resources — it gives you enhanced capacity to process new information and integrate it with existing stores of knowledge.

Cites ericcson to say that
- extreme performance isn’t a function of genetics
- extreme performance isn’t a function of just experience, or time

You need deliberate practice
- focus on performing
- design it to improve performance beyond current levels
- reflect on weaknesses
- continuous feedback

Antecednets of DP
- it isn’t fun
- not pleasurable, but you do it to gain mastery
- achievement orientation
- self efficacy
- self control


After you DP and become an expert, you can…
- better discern good from bad info
- recognize complex patterns
- see the meaning behind something
- better access to stored memory
- expanded scope of working memory
- enhanced meta cognition (understand own knowledge and weaknesses)







keywords
- review of delibrate practice
- psych of performance


#deliberate-practice
#psych-of-performance
#strategy













# people's desires regarding face

Facework skill is based on P. Brown and Levinson’s (1978, 1987) model of politeness. The model defines face as the public image or conception of self that an individual conveys to others (Cupach & Metts, 1994). People are thought to have three basic “face wants”: the desire to be included and accepted by others, the desire to be respected and thought competent by others, and the desire to be autonomous or not imposed on by others (Lim & Bowers, 1991). 

#face
#social-psychology
#desires
#needs
#edge













# Denrell & Kovacs, 2020 “The ecology of management concepts”

How does a concept become popular?
- similar to existing concepts
- located in a popular domain
- combined with similar, existing concepts




Novel concepts need to do a few things to become popular
- affiliate with existing popular concepts
- provide a novel solution to a popular problem
- criticize a popular concept
- really hard to make something popular that tries to unite distinct concepts


keywords
- theory building
- concepts


#strategy
#novelty
#similarity-difference
#how-do-concepts-become-popular



















# emergence of pinwheel in dogs



Put food in circular bowl, then dogs form a pinwheel. Collective behavior emerges. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0JmeZXBaUFo
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q3caObZG4Yc

But it does not always emerge
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iWG8Co2ga30


#puppies
#dogs
#emergence
#pinwheel
#dog-emergence







# goodhart football example

Imagine you coached a professional football team and your third down conversion rate was the lowest in the league. The team’s owner calls you into his office and tells you to increase your third down conversion rate by 15% by the end of the season or you’re out of a job. This makes a certain kind of sense - you certainly don’t want to be last in the league for third down conversions, that’s not good at all. So as a coach you change your behaviors. You never run the ball if it’s second down and more than three to go. When it is third down, you never take a risk. Generally speaking, you pass the ball more. And your third down conversion rate goes up, however, you start losing more games. Your play calling becomes predictable. You take dramatic risks on second down, no risk on third and short, wild risks on third and long, and you get away from the running game altogether, even though your QB is trash. You avoid creativity and just run plays that “work”. Long term, you build a team with third down conversions in mind, not any of the other tangible or intangibles needed to build a championship team. And of course, the most obvious point is, the game isn’t won by third down conversions. The game isn’t won by total offensive yards or number of turnovers or any of that. The game is won when you score more points than the other team, and while some of those other stats are useful in analysis, they aren’t helpful if you don’t apply good judgment, and they are actually distracting if you attach high stakes “accountability” to any metric other than “score more than the other guys”. Apply this to schools, hospitals, the military, politics, police, charity, private business, etc.

In professional football there are people who will keep track of all of those statistics. But say you’re a high school football coach. The athletics director calls you in and tells you a similar thing - your third down conversion rate sucks (probably), but we don’t have anyone to actually track those stats. “If it’s not measured, it didn’t happen! Here’s a stat-tracker,” she says. “Just plug in what happens every play, or have an assistant coach do it, and we’ll meet on Monday to discuss what needs to be improved.” Side note - the athletics director was recently hired by an unathletic school board because she had a binder full of numbers, hundreds of pages, and numbers = smart. So now, half of the coaching staff is jotting down numbers so some administrator can assign high-stakes accountability to some individual metric, e.g. third down conversions. Your number of hours actually coaching players is automatically cut in half as you have to take time to collect and input data. To ensure compliance and accountability, a number of rules are added in terms of who can collect the data, where the data is entered, who gets to “analyze” it, and so on. All of the easy things (third down conversions) are collected, all of the difficult-to-quantify (leadership ability) is ignored, and any data point that is particularly “scary” is fudged. Apply this to schools, hospitals, the military, politics, police, charity, private business, etc.

First game after meeting with the athletics director, your return guy returns a kick-off for a touchdown, and also he returns a punt in the fourth quarter to win the game. Happy days! That means 66% of Friday’s touchdowns were scored on special teams. During your Monday sit-down with the athletics director, she points this out, declaring that special teams are the future of your team! So you spend roughly 66% of your time training and practicing with special teams, seriously neglecting your offensive & defensive squads. Of course, you get blown out the following week. Apply this to schools, hospitals, the military, politics, police, charity, private business, etc.

You are still the high school coach. A parent is pressuring you. His son is an excellent wide receiver and plans on playing in college. He needs more passes for the highlight reel and his application. Problem is, your QB can’t throw more than six yards accurately, and the defense always puts their best corner on the son (because he is, actually, really good). The pressure gets to the athletics director, who is beginning to be your not-favorite-person, and insists that Hot Shot gets a minimum of six passes per game, which basically amounts to around six turn-overs per game. Apply this to schools, hospitals, the military, politics, police, charity, private business, etc.

After a season of this, the game becomes not very fun for coaches or players, and anyone who is any good joins the Lacrosse team. Apply this to schools, hospitals, the military, politics, police, charity, private business, etc.


#pg-goodhart









# Kovacs & Sharkey, 2014 “The paradox of publicity: how awards”

When a popular book wins an award, its subsequent ratings decline. An award makes a book public, which exposes it to a wider audience with more diverse views. Subsequent views are then more likely to be negative.

So, signals of quality promote adoption in the short run but negatively influence evaluation once awarded.

Also, a “status shock” is off-putting to some, so they rate it poorly.


Theories of status bias would suggest that after a book wins an award, people should be cognitively pruned by the high status of the book and therefore rate it negatively. But the opposite occurs in the real world. After a book wins an award, receives high status, and goes public, ratings decline.

Boosts in status come with greater attention from the outside world. This increases the size of their audience. As the audience grows, its composition changes. When audience members evaluating an object are attracted to it because of its status rather than its subjective features, mismatches between the object and the tastes of the audience members are likely to occur.




keywords
- performance declines
- status
- strategy


#strategy
#status-shock
#publicity
#awards-creates-publicity
#status











# more than half of investors under 35 get investing advice from Youtube

https://www.finrafoundation.org/sites/finrafoundation/files/NFCS-Investor-Report-Changing-Landscape.pdf?utm_source=MM&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=O%5FFoundation%5FNewsRelease%5F121522%5FFINAL



https://twitter.com/MylesUdland/status/1603751122174353408?s=20&t=lhb9t2mn3OQ02adHmIljVw


#descriptive-data
#finance








Mimetic
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Qu6vBebwwg&list=PL_xn3B6eWvGsILrh5v5nq0rMp6OjuBOo9

#to-watch

















# sex differences in solving problems







Men think that they can solve problems by changing the organization chart, updating the policies and procedures, rolling out a training program, changing the compensation system, or adopting new technology. Women think that they can solve problems by removing the impediments to better teamwork, and they can spot the individuals who are the main source of the trouble.



https://arnoldkling.substack.com/p/on-feminism?utm_source=post-email-title&publication_id=338673&post_id=84582438&isFreemail=true&utm_medium=email



Rob Henderson writes,

Boys’ antisocial behavior is overt; violence, theft, aggression, etc. For girls antisocial behavior takes the form of gossip, inuendo, reputation destruction, and back-biting. Social media facilitates this form of aggression. Indirect aggression scales online in a way that direct aggression does not. Penalties of overt aggression are clear; but you can more easily get away with covert aggression. Girls are now subject to bullying by their peers in a way they never have before. [You can’t punch a thousand people in the face at the same time, but you can get a thousand people to hate a single person overnight].

Henderson is annotating a conversation between Jordan Peterson and Jean Twenge, so I don’t know who exactly is making this point. But it aligns with my view of how society is changing to run by female methods (gossip at scale) rather than by male methods (impersonal rules). Again, there is much more in Henderson’s post. Also, I believe that Peterson is outstanding as an interviewer.



arnold kling substack



https://arnoldkling.substack.com/p/elite-academias-cuckoos-nest?utm_source=profile&utm_medium=reader2







Another disturbing trend is the feminization of higher education. Cory Clark and Bo Winegard summarize the results of numerous surveys.

As is always the case when discussing group differences, these are averages. It is important to emphasize that plenty of women champion academic freedom and resist the claim that scholars should suppress research for moral reasons.

But on average,

men are more tolerant of controversial and potentially offensive scientific findings being pursued, disseminated, and discussed, and women are more willing to obstruct or suppress science perceived to be potentially harmful or offensive. Put more simply, men are relatively more interested in advancing what is empirically correct, and women are relatively more interested in advancing what is morally desirable.






When it comes to social arrangements, men tend to set up institutions that use impersonal rules, competition, and rewards for excellence. Women tend to use social arrangements that feature gossip, personal exclusion (“I don’t like her. She can’t come to my party”), and ad hoc appeals for authorities to intervene on behalf of those who fall short of excellence.

I think that women should be included in higher education and other realms where they once were not welcome. But I think that our institutions worked better when they operated under impersonal rules, competition, and rewards for excellence.

Think of women’s soccer. They approach the game the way that men do. They don’t get together and say “Let’s not pass the ball to Janet. We don’t like her any more. Right?” They don’t say, “It’s not fair that Sally never gets to be goalie. Let her play goalie this game.”

Other institutions could have absorbed women without sacrificing the operating principles necessary to make them work well. But I don’t see things turning around.

Taking all the trends together, it looks to me like tomorrow belongs to the Woke.





A rebuttle of Anita's work
- she says "women are more socially perceptive, so they work better for teams"

https://www.arnoldkling.com/blog/feminized-culture/

Kling:
- men focus on systems
- women focus on gossip at scale, exclude rivals rather than reconcile with them



This leads me to speculate on the consequences of adding a lot of women to formerly male domains. Over the past several decades, a number of important institutions that were formerly almost exclusively male now include many women: academia, journalism, politics, and management positions in organizations. These institutions increasingly are discarding the values that sustained them when the female presence was less.

1. The older culture saw differential rewards as just when based on performance. The newer culture sees differential rewards as unjust.

2. The older culture sought people who demonstrate the most competence. The newer culture seeks to nurture those who are at a disadvantage.

3. The older culture admires those who seek to stand out. The newer culture disdains such people.

4. The older culture uses proportional punishment that is predictable based on known rules. The newer culture suddenly turns against a target and permanently banishes the alleged violator, based on the latest moral fashions.

5. The older culture valued open debate. The newer culture seeks to curtail speech it regards as dangerous.

6. The older culture saw liberty as essential to a good society. The newer culture sees conformity as essential to a good society.

7. The older culture was oriented toward achievement. The newer culture is oriented toward safety. Hence, we cannot complete major construction projects, like bridges, as efficiently as we used to.



I think that in each case, the older culture was consistent with male tendencies (what Benenson calls “warriors”); the newer culture is consistent with female tendencies (what she calls “worriers”). Keep in mind that men can have worrier personalities and women can have warrior personalities, but those are not the norm.

Overall, we have made institutions harder for warriors to navigate. College no longer helps men to make the transition to adulthood. It keeps them sheltered and controlled, and after graduation they end up living with their parents.

Why did opening up opportunities for women lead to this outcome? One can imagine other outcomes. Perhaps women would have assimilated into the male culture, adopting some male tendencies in the process. Perhaps women and men would have retained their different behavioral tendencies but agreed to accommodate one another.

Instead, both men and women seem to have agreed that a purge of male tendencies is in order. Some women scorn male values as tools of oppression, and most men would rather accommodate this view than voice disagreement.


#pg-red-tape
#items
#sex-differences-solving-problems
#explanation
#anti-woke










# Eriksson & Ortega 2006 “The adoption of job rotation”

This paper tests three possible explanations for why firms adopt job rotation: employee learning (rotation makes employees more versatile), employer learning (through rotation, employers learn more about individual workers’ strengths), and employee motivation (rotation mitigates boredom).

The results reject the employee motivation hypothesis but support the employee learning and especially the employer learning hypotheses.

Most economic studies are firm-level, which miss the effects of employee characteristics. Most applied psych studies examine single firms, which raises the issue of whether their results are representative.

NOTE
- they didn’t measure these theories directly

“We find only limited support for the employee motivation hypothesis. Job rotation schemes were not more likely in firms with long-tenured employees, or in firms with a relatively flat hieararchy and hence only small promotion prospects. Favoring the employee learning hypothesis, firms that spent more on training were more likely to rotate workers.”

See how indirect these tests are?
- the theory is about: if rotate, then X
- but the test has job rotation as a DV


keywords
- research methods argument
- grad student philosophy argument
- how to open a paper
- motivation
- satisfaction

#economics
#motivation
#satisfaction
#job-rotation
#job-characteristics
#grad-reading

































# Gallardo, Dries, & Cruz, 2013 “What is the meaning of talent in the world of work?”

Talent currently means whatever the writer or business leader wants it to mean. This hinders talent-management theories.

(a) talent as characteristics of people

Some propose that talent is innate

(b) talent as mastery

Some propose that talent is the result of deliberate practice.

(c) talent as commitment

An intrinsic quality that directs focus, attention, and dedication.

(d) talent as fit

keywords
- conceptual differences
- no integration or forward approach posited








































# Habbert & Schroeder, 2020 “To build efficacy, eat the frog first”

Should you work on easy tasks first or hard tasks first?

People believe that (and prefer to) starting easy and then completing more difficult tasks will enhance efficacy.

When actually completing tasks, efficacy is greatest when people complete the most difficult tasks first.

NOTHING ABOUT PERFORMANCE.
LAB TASKS.
TASKS FOR PLEASURE, OR WORK, OR THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR SKILL?





keywords
- motivation
- self regulation
- self efficacy


#motivation
#self-regulation
#academese
#easy-or-hard-task-first
































# shane gillis quote

happiness isn't real
especially if you have a really good childhood. it is all downhill from there


#quote
#philosophy







# glassman humor


You know what they say, you don't know what X is, you might be a racist

#humor
#glassman













# glassman humor



[not what you identify as trick]
What do you like to eat?
What are you scared of?

No, I asked what do you like to eat, not what you identify as...


#humor
#glassman

















# glassman and are you garbage humor


Tell me about...
Have you been reading my diary?
I would rather...
Oh is that the thing you get when you break your ankle...a personality disorder
Oh you must have one of those, what's it called? [scooter] ... personality disorder

"you look like" + voice impression
[talking about a cousin who was a magician. Then do voices of that magician...] You guys know how to create a lawsuit? Let me show you. This trick lasts years. You'll be watching a movie one day in the future and you'll cry. 
So, this is really just "you look like." and then followed with voices of that individual. 

How could I have done that with Bryanna? "you look like" + voices
Or your Grandfather saved your life in a snowstorm? 
Or your Grandfather was your best friend while you were growing up in South Florida?

Was your favorite game hey is grandpa sleeping or he is no longer with us?
Here Bri I"m gonna show you how to get all the boys attention. The first thing you wanna do is talk about vietnam...
Your version of eating healthy was putting skim milk in your frosted flakes



#glassman
#ayg
#humor
#conversations
#social-animal
#flirt-opener
#flirt





















# glassman people are not aware



Rick Glassman

Having a bad sense of humor is more of a symptom. Underneath is really what matters: lack of awareness. People don't typically say, "I know what you meant. I just didn't find it funny." More common: "I didn't like that because I thought you meant this..." Oh I didn't realize what you meant. It is less about lack of sense of humor and more about lack of awareness. 

And lack of awareness comes from inability to question things. You need people to be challeneged, to meet all sorts of different people, so that they are challeneged and appreciate nuance and question things and see/reflect on/argue with different points of view. 



#glassman
#philosophy
#quote
























# christopher theory. more jobs needed practice rather than pure performance

theory of 

more practice, less performance

but

need performance where you can flow and feel the benefits.
think about practicing piano every day without performing.

You need way way way more time to freely practice your craft or your skill
But, that practice time needs to be building up to a performance where you get to realize your improvements in front of others
Then back to practice



#christopher-thinking
#research-idea
#next-study
#flow
#normative
#christopher-theory


























# christopher theory of why "what are you proud of?" is great on dates

Ask people "what are you proud of" is a fantastic question for outings because it sets of an emotional cascade. 

Pride arises when we feel responsible for accomplishing something that others will value. 
If my grandfather wins the lottery and is going to share the winnings with the family, I feel happy but not pride.
If I place a put option on the market and win a bunch of money to share with my family, I feel pride. 

What's interesting about pride is the behavior it causes, which is social engagement. Pride is one of the strongest emotions we know of that makes people want to talk and engage with others. 

So, if you ask someone about what they are proud of, they will speak about it. By speaking about it, they will ignite some underlying pride emotions. By igniting pride emotions, they will want to talk to you more.

#christopher-theory











# john zimmerman tech people focus way to much invention and not enough on innovation (execution)

People want AI to do magical things they cannot even consider. 
Stop thinking like that. 
Dumb down your problem space.
Develop ideas about how AI can execute dumb things better. 

Stop focusing on inventing magic. Focus instead on slight modifications to facilitate better execution. 

#innovation
#zimmerman



























# christopher thinking




It's funny to reflect on the questions people ask when they are trying to learn about your or converse with you.

Today I was asked by a girl, "what are you really good at?"

I could not come up with an answer. I hesitated. Mind blank. After about 15 long seconds, I replied, "I'm not sure I'm great at anything. I suppose I'm good what I do...otherwise I wouldn't have a job." 

This question strikes me as revealing, revealing about the personality of the individual I was with. I would never think to ask such a question.

What kinds of books do you like to read? What's the last thing that frustrated you? What did you expect when you moved to this city but have been disatisfied with once you arrived? Think about a close friend, what was happening the moment you realized this person would become important in your life? These are the questions I would ask. The question, "what are you excellent at" would never cross my mind. 



#philosophy
#quote
#christopher-thinking























# christophter thinking



I love intimate moments. I don't mean sex, although sex can be intimate. I mean the feeling of two people, us, knowing something that no one else gets. 

Finding and navigating little dark corners of life that no one knows about. There's something magical about that. 


Listen to Blue Moon by Oscar Peterson and then Blues in Hoss' Flat
Close your eyes and imagine 
whatever comes to mind is what I want to do. 
Whatever comes to mind when you listen to Blues in Hoss' Flat is what I want to do. 

#philosophy
#quote
#christopher-thinking























# tolerance of stupidity


Watchin Vivek play along with this interview was like watching an adult play a game with a 5 year old. The 5 year old will make up their own rules as the game progresses and the adult goes along with it because they’re a child.


#quote
#philosophy






















# autism


Autism

Can't do X while Y
Can't speak while I'm writing things down on computer.

Get upset when things don't go according to plan, or when I'm interrupted from doing what I want to do/routine.
- unless I know before hand that there is no plan

Very interested in patterns. Look for patterns in everything. 

Non-fiction.

Huge preference for doing things on my own.

Hard time looking people in the eye and communicating. 

I prefer doing things the same way - for instance my morning routine or trip to the supermarket

I find myself becoming strongly absorbed in something – even obsessional.

I like to collect information about things I'm interested in.

I am very sensitive to noise and will wear earplugs or cover my ears in certain situations

Sometimes people say I am being rude, even though I think I am being polite.

Very hard time talking to groups of people. 




#autism
#psychometrics
#psych-quiz
#love-languages

























# Hershatter & Epstein, 2010 “Millennials and the world of work”

Entered the workforce in 2004, and will continue to do so until 2022.

This cohort behaves much like its predecors:
- same altruism
- same family-orientation
- same motivation
- same concern with money

But they have a different relationship with technology.

Grew up with immediate access to everything.
Assume that they have a right to view anything. Hate ownership or restrictions.
Never have to present without enhanced visual cues.
No motivation to assess reliability or accuracy of evidence.
Read fewer books and our writing stinks.
Desire to publicly express our opinions.
Ambitious, assertive, and more narcissistic.
Fine with creating content for others to see.
Texting more common for us than email.

Grew up in the “No child left behind” era
- Millenials have an inherent trust in organizations and a strong preference for the structures and systems that support them.
- More confident in government than any other generation
- grown accustomed to nurturing environments

We are at pressure to compete with others at every life stage.

All college professors hear complaints from students about ambiguity in homework assignments.

Any elements of ambiguity, or any project or exam that requires Millenials to work without guidelines, templates, or examples, results in a great deal of angst, because they have not had much practice producing without explicit instructions, well defined criteria for success, and specific deadlines by others.

72% of millenials want structured environments with clear rules, compared with just 33% of gen Xers.


Millennials were indoctrinated from their earliest moment to seek approval and affirmation. In the workplace, this has led to a sometimes excessive propensity to continuously seek guidance and direction. Managers therefore often find themselves in the unenviable position of having to spend a disproportionate amount of time managing people who were presumably hired to help them.





keywords
- some unempirical writing about millenials




#generational-differences


























# Lang, Bliese, & Adler, 2019 “Opening the black box”

Present a staistical approach for thinking about group change over time. They argue that groups can change in two ways. They display trajectories that increase or decrease. Or, member configurations can change, such that members become similar (or dissimilar) over time.
- a consensus element (group members converge on a perception)
- direction element (behaviors or perceptions increase or decrease)

Basically, they argue that you should look at a growth model to determine increases or decreases, examine correlates of those trends, and then examine the residual variance to see if consensus improves at later periods.

EXAMPLES OF EXPLANATORY ANALYSES.
- NO, you are not doing an explanatory analysis

keywords
- dumb causal statements
- not explanatory
- growth modeling




#consensus-emergence-model












































# Maupin, McCusker, & Slaughter “A tale of three approaches: leveraging organizational discourse”

Leadership research must be able to handle several things: temporal dynamics, contextual boundary conditions, and multiple levels.

(a) org discourse analysis

Analyze text data
Look at interaction patterns

(b) relational event modeling

Similar to network modeling

(c) dynamic network analysis

combine network analysis with simulations



#discourse-analysis







































# Han & Ravid, 2020 “Star turnover and the value of human capital”

Are stars necessary for the financial success of the company? Yes.

Theater shows routinely turn over actors in lead roles. Otherwise, the show stays the same, including the director, the script, other actors and, the physical theater environment. Even the lines performed do not change the set. Therefore, the theater provides a unique laboratory for assessing the value of human capital to an enterprise, a question that has been studied in other contexts, including the CEO value literature. We compare revenues, capacity, and ticket prices just before and just after transitions of top cast members. We find that decorated theater stars significantly affect the financial success of theater shows, supporting the MacDonald version of the superstar hypothesis.


Ideally, one would want to run the firm with one CEO, then roll back time, and run the firm through the same environment and challenges with another CEO. This is, of course, impossible; however, the experiment in our paper is close to this idealized setting.

CEOs are at the top 17% in cognitive ability, top 8% in noncognitive abilitiy, and top 26% in height
- Adams et al., 2018

Talented individuals tend to leave firms as they approach financial distress
- Groysberg et al., 2008
- Baghai et al., 2017

GOOD EXPLANATIONS OF ROSEN AND ADLER SEMINAL PAPERS SHOWING THAT STARS NEED NOT BE MORE TALENTED THAN NON STARS.


keywords
- star performers
- financial performnace
- psych of performance
- organizational performance


#stars
#power-laws
#psych-of-performance
#organizational-performance
#star-performance
#strategy






































# Mollick, 2012 “People and process, suits and innovators”

Performance differences between firms are generally attributed to organizational factors rather than to differences in the individuals who make up firms. The results here suggest that variation among individuals matter far more in organizational performance than is generally assumed.


In traditional industries where economies of scale and scope are critical, such as manufacturing, there, indeed, seems to be little need to take individuals into account to explain performance. Take, for example, Toyota as described by Adler, Goldoftas, and Levine (1999). With a six-layered bureaucracy, cross-trained workers, and clearly delineated departments, Toyota built a manufacturing powerhouse that integrates workers into a complex mechanism to produce cars efficiently. In the Toyota production system, success is based on routines and organizational processes (Nelson and Winter, 1982) multiplying the effects of the individual workers who are ultimately replaceable and interchangeable with others who have received the same extensive training. The result is a consistent and reliable process that does not rely on any individual worker’s skills, but rather firm-level processes to hire and train the appropriate individuals for the appropriate roles.

In other areas, such as knowledge work or entrepreneurship, individual differences are going to matter.

Cool writing on star performers.

star scientists who operate within firms and universities have significant individual effects on the performance of firms in the biotechnology (Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong, 1998, 2001) and
semiconductor (Torero, 1998) industries. Further, the distribution of ability across innovative roles is highly skewed. Software development exhibits extreme individual differences, as studies have demonstrated that a top computer programmer typically produces the same amount of work as 10 to 20 average programmers during any given time period, and with fewer errors (Cusumano, 2004; Sackman, Erickson, and Grant, 1968). A similar
skew is found in scientific research, where Lotka’s Law observes that just six percent of publishing scientists are responsible for 50 percent of all publications, a difference due at least in part to varying abilities among scientists (Stephan, 1996).




keywords
- people make the place
- performance
- psych of performance
- star performers


#people-vs-org
#strategy
#star-performers
#stars
#human-capital
#organizational-performance
#people-make-the-place
#structure-vs-characteristics
#great-paper













# List et al., 2020 “On the role of group size in tournaments”


Do individuals offer more or less effort as the group size increases in a tournament competition?

A critical but understudied factor is luck (the random shock).

Suppose that firms know that there are many ways to develop a new product. Each firm then expects to be successful in developing a product, and it also expects that at least one other firm will be successful too. Hence, it will use a lot of effort in the hopes of beating its competitor, especially so as more firms start to compete.

Alternatively, suppose that firms believe the probability of developing a very successful product is small. They expect luck to play a role in finding a successful product for some company. If the number of competing firms is large, then the focal firm knows that it is unlikely to generate the lucky draw. But if there are few firms, then the focal firm may indeed be the one that wins the lucky draw.

So, if the game is pure luck, then you decrease effort as more people join. If the game is little luck, then you increase effort as more people join.


On the one hand, larger tournaments induce greater levels of competition, and hence we would expect greater effort exerted by individual agents. On the other hand, the probability of winning a large tournament is smaller, providing agents with weaker incentives to exert effort. Loury (1979) and Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983) argue that the former effect tends to dominate the latter. Prendergast (1999) argues that the size of the prize needs to increase with group size to prevent individual effort from falling. Harbring and Irelenbusch (2003) find that effort decreases with group size.




Luck is a large component of the outcome. 
Large pool = decrease effort
Small pool = more effort

Luck is a small component of the outcome
Large pool = more effort
Small pool = just enough effort to beat the other team



Whether people invest effort is a function of both the number of competitors and the mass associated with "good draws" (i.e., luck). 
When the horizon is rich (gold rush)/low luck, then you increase effort when more people compete. 
When the horizon is poor (lottery / fishing), then you decrease effort as more people compete. 

If you are running a software development contest, you should allow more agents to compete if the mass on favorable outcomes is large. 

Low luck / lots of mass over favorable outcomes means there are many routes to being successful. 
[example]
Consider the case of product innovations, such as various drugs, autonomous vehicles, or pollution-abatement equipment. There are multiple ways to develop such new products. Suppose that there are many avenues that look very promising (and equally so) ex ante. All firms participating in the race arbitrarily choose a development path from the available set. Each individual firm then expects to be successful in developing the new product itself, but it also expects that at least one other firm is likely to be successful, too. Hence, effort is crucial in determining the winner, and firms invest a lot in equilibrium—and more so than if the number of competing firms is few.



So, take dating from the male perspective. 
In an environment with many quality women (lots of routes with being successful). More competitors = increase effort. 
In an environment with few quality women (few routes of being successful). More competitors = decrease effort. 




Sort of like VIE theory
- can i achieve the outcome?
- do I value the outcome?
+ yes = effort

Tournament theory:
- are there many competitors?
- are there many routes to success? (do I expect to be successful, if I strive?)
+ yes = effort




Here it is
- q1: how many other people are there? many of few competitors?
- q2: do I expect to be successful if I take action? (luck / mass of favorable outcomes / resource environment)
when I don't really expect to be successful, then I increase effort as competitors leave
when I really expect to be successful, then I increase effort as competitors join



research idea 1 = people biased toward focusing on people rather than luck

Tell people, 
"the next tournament will have many more people" 
and
"the next tournament will be pure luck"

people will focus much more on the number of people rather than the extent to which luck plays a role




research idea 2: combine with kittur

kittur
- high coordination = adding more people creates burden
- low coordination = adding more people offers resources

tournament
- adding more people causes greater effort when the

idk i can't make anything in this route






keywords
- luck
- random noise
- shocks
- performance
- psych of performance
- organizational performance
- tournaments


#tournaments
#economics
#luck
#psych-of-performance
#organizational-performance
#team-performance
#group-size
#competition
#working-idea












































# Gartenberg & Wulf, 2020 “competition and pay inequality”

Cool discussion of the affects of pay differences across employees.

Consistent with the motivating effects of performance pay, one set of studies has found pay inequality within firms to be associated with positive outcomes. Greater pay differences relative to the CEO have been linked to reduced turnover (Kacperczyk and Balachandran 2018), while greater pay dispersion among peers has led to reduced turnover among the top performers (Carnahan et al. 2012). A second set, however, finds high pay inequality within firms to be associated with negative outcomes, including higher average turn- over rates (Wade et al. 2006), lower output quality (Cowherd and Levine 1992), reduced productivity (Obloj and Zenger 2017), worse collaboration (Siegel and Hambrick 2005), and lower job satisfaction (Pfeffer and Langton 1993, Card et al. 2012).


keywords
- performance
- psych of performance
- pay
- incentives
- pay discrepancy

#pay-for-performance
#incentives
#economics
#performance-management
#pay-discrepancy






























# Pageli et al., 2020 “The tension between worker safety and organizational survival”




Do you need safety for your organization to survive?

No. This paper finds a negative relationship between safety and survival. Orgs that offered the most safety were the least likely to survive.

Implementing safety protocols costs more than dealing with fines. Most orgs are willing to pay fines, harm workers, or have sanctions placed on them. The cost of doing so is lower than implementing a safety protocol.


The argument that a safer workplace will increase profits is as follows. Build- ing and leveraging human capital to develop unique capabilities is a key enabler for creating long-term competitive advantage (e.g., Becker 1993, Hatch and Dyer 2004). When the work environment is not safe, human capital is being harmed, not built. Workers in unsafe environments engage in self-protection and are not motivated to improve the organization’s operations (Das et al. 2008). However, workers in safe environments do not have to dedicate resources to self- protection and can be motivated to engage in improving the organization’s operations; safety provides a necessary condition to leverage human capital into the development of unique capabilities and long-term competitive advantage (Das et al. 2008). Organizations that harm their human capital cannot build these capabilities and will be less likely to survive. This suggests that market mechanisms alone should eliminate poor safety.

But above isn’t true. Instead, there is more support for the costly regulation hypothesis. Increase pace and productivity but at the cost of accidents among workers (Diwas & Terwiesch, 2009; Kuntz et al., 2015; Wiengarten et al., 2017). Orgs that don’t provide safety gain an economic advantage in productivity or output.

Orgs can handle the fines they receive from poor safety (Bradbury 2006).




keywords
- opposite of psych safety
- environmental safety
- safe workplace
- productivity
- psych of performance
- environment


#safety
#psych-safety
#productivity
#organizational-performance
#strategy
#workplace-safety
#injuries
#hazards
#safety-profits























# Lee 2017 “How performance incentives shape individual exploration”

Some intro writing to the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation.

Firms have to balance exploring with exploiting, as do individuals. There are different strategies to do so. Incentives might be one way to get people to switch. When you reduce performance-based pay, people explore more.


keywords
- exploration vs exploitation
- incentives


#exploration-exploitation




























# Lee & Puranam 2017 “Incentive redesign and collaboration”

The effect of payment incentives on effort and performance. People seem to care not only about their own pay but also the pay they receive relative to their peers.

They test agency theory, equity theory, and goal frame theory. They find the most support for goal framing theory.

In our empirical setting, the evidence is strongly supportive of the existence of social effects, and in particular of the form predicted by goal framing theory; the change of a focal agent A’s incentives matters to B not because of effects on perceived equity, but because it makes both A and B more likely to adopt a particular goal frame.

SO, goals and states of minds about goals is huge. Not about fairness. Not about individual agency. It’s about goal frame of mind.




Agency theory and the effects of incentives

The most prevalent “individual effects” per- spective on incentives in the strategy literature is anchored in the economics of agency relationships (Holmstrom & Milgrom, 1994; Jensen & Meckling, 1976). Agency theory assumes that agents are risk averse and rational actors motivated by self-interest, and hence principals can motivate agents by con- trolling their incentives (Eisenhardt, 1989). While the evidence on the role of risk-bearing in incen- tive contracts is not compelling, the basic premise of agency theory — that given costly efforts, incen- tives have to be set such that the benefit of effort exceeds the costs — is well accepted (e.g., Prender- gast, 1999, 2000).

Many agency theory-based studies of incen- tive compensation support the notion that performance-related pay can drive an agent to significantly increase her effort level on her own tasks—that is, increase production efforts. For example, Lazear (2000) shows that the productiv- ity of windshield installers in a large auto glass company increased 44% when the installers’ pay scheme was changed from fixed wage to pay-for-performance. Similar increases in task productivity have been demonstrated in a ran- domized field experiment with Canadian tree planters (Shearer, 2004).


So, when a firm switches from a pay for performance to a fixed salary, then individual effort should decline.


Equity theory

In contrast, equity theory (Adams, 1963) states that individuals care about fair treatment in respect to their closest comparable peers (also see Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Festinger, 1954). The key premise of the theory is that people will care not only about the absolute amount of rewards they receive, but also the relative amount of rewards they receive compared to someone who is performing similar tasks. The most salient difference between this the- ory and agency theory is that it takes into explicit consideration the outcomes of peers—that is, the social effects of incentives, besides the individual effects.

As Larkin, Pierce, and Gino (2012) note, overconfi- dence (in their own abilities) makes it likely that employees see receiving less than others as inequity (Martin, 1982; Zenger, 1994), but may not perceive inequity in their receiving more than others.

Indeed, although the original formulation of equity theory (Adams, 1963) argues that overre- warded individuals (relative to peers) feel the same “unfairness” in their pay level compared to those who are being underrewarded, later studies have found that overrewarded individuals perceive sig- nificantly less unfairness or perhaps even no unfair- ness (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Ho & Su, 2009). This in turn implies that the effects of a change in incentives from pay-for-performance to fixed salary could possibly differ according to an individual’s performance relative to others.

So, when a firm switches from a pay for performance to a fixed salary, then high performers will be pissed but low performers will be happy.

Goal Framing Theory


This theory proposes taxonomy of overarch- ing goals that influence the cognitions and motiva- tions of individuals, and in turn affect individuals’ behaviors (Foss & Lindenberg, 2013; Lindenberg, 2013; Lindenberg & Foss, 2011). Lindenberg and Foss (2011) introduced three types of overarching goals: hedonic, gain, and normative. A hedonic goal expresses the desire to improve one’s feelings at the moment; a gain goal expresses the desire to improve one’s own personal resources; and a normative goal expresses the desire to act appropriately in the ser- vice of a collective entity, such as the group one belongs to.

These goal frames govern what stimuli are con- sidered relevant, what alternatives are considered, what knowledge we draw on, what beliefs we hold about the possible behaviors of others (e.g., trust- worthiness), and of course most importantly, which subgoals are suppressed and which ones are acti- vated.

For this reason, switching from a pay-for-performance incentive system (that puts strong emphasis on the personal gain goal frame) to a fixed salary system (which makes peers and the continued existence of the firm more salient for individuals) should allow the normative goal frame into the foreground, and therefore trigger a joint production motivation. In turn, this should encourage helping behaviors between organizational members in order to maximize the joint outcome.

In other words, creating a “team-based” incentive creates a team-based mindset. But fixed pay is a long way from “team-based” incentive. It’s more like a “removal of my individual talent” thing.


keywords
- motivation
- self regulation
- performance
- psych of performance


#psych-of-performance
#incentives
#pay-for-performance
#performance-management
#motivation
#self-regulation
#goals
#pay-discrepancy
#relative-pay




























# Wai 2014 “Experts are born, then made”

Cognitive ability is super important.

High g people earn many more degrees.
High status people (judges, senators, billionaires) are often high g
Even within the top 1% of g, differences in ability make a difference.


keywords
- intelligence
- performnace
- cognitive ability
- g




#intelligence
#nature-nurture






















# Gharbi "Race and the race for the White House"

https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/n8bkh

When researchers hold biased priors about a topic, they write a paper and run a study to support any opinion that they want. 


esearchers also tend to hold strong negative opinions about Trump. Consequently, they have approached this research with uncharitable priors about the kind of person who would support him and what they would be motivated by. Research design and data analysis often seem to be oriented towards reinforcing those assumptions.


keywords
- biased research
- diversity
- research methods
- vignette studies



#science-of-science
#phil-of-science
#diversity
#anti-woke


















# Gharbi "wokeness"

https://musaalgharbi.com/2020/12/15/great-awokening-racial-realities/

Huge spike in whites identifying as liberal from 04 to 19 (30 to 55 percent). Other demographics remain about the same (30ish%). 

Indeed, for a particular subset of white people, antiracism has itself become something akin to a religious creed. There is a discourse of slavery as America’s original sin, of whiteness as a primeval and malevolent force responsible for, or implicated in, virtually all of the world’s ills.

There is a gnostic element, with adherents believing that they can see the ‘real’ structures of the world, which others are blind to – along with the sense of superiority that accompanies such beliefs. There is an eschatological sense of being on the ‘right side of history,’ and in many circles, an intolerance for doubts or heresy.

When elite, highly-educated people move away from religion, they look for something else to tie their identity to...which is why communism and totalitarianism ideas are so popular. 




keywords
- political psych

#anti-woke
#diversity
#wokeness-beliefs










# why you must care about precise language


WHY YOU MUST CARE ABOUT PRECISE LANGUAGE
if not, it will be used to justify anything (and potentially things that are very bad)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IurTEIn7QUs
- 45:30
"that language of threat makes me nervous"
A lot of this abstract, imprecise, but scary language was used on the war on terror to justify everything.
If you can classify someone as a threat to national security, you can do anything you want (unlawfully) to that person.
This abstract language will be used to demonize and perhaps jail -- or at minimum make life very difficult for -- anyone they deem inconvenient.




Einav hart
title slides = "When not to negotiate" | "When to avoid negotiation"
But her presentation was about the consequences of negotiating vs not negotiating
- when you negotiate, people give less effort
- when you do not negotiate, people give more effort
Her studies were different from her title slide
Her title slide implies that she will be studying "under these circumstances, you should not even try to negotiate." 

#good-writing
#precise-language
#academese
#businessese
#lawyerese
#christopher-thinking
#clear-language


















# Gharbi "trump election"

https://musaalgharbi.com/2020/08/06/trump-voters-misunderstood/
https://musaalgharbi.com/2020/11/02/understanding-trump-success-minority-voters/

Trump didn't mobilize a bunch of racist whites to come and vote. He received substantially fewer votes from whites than Romney did. But he received substantially more votes from Hispanics and other minorities. 



#anti-woke
#trump-election















# red tape

harvard committee writes a 26 report stating that their ultimate solution is to create yet another committee. Regardless of your stance on the committees goal, the procedural absurdity is clear. A presidential task force led to another task force which, after significant time, led to a committee with almost the exact same name as the second task force. I challenge anyone other than the task force member themselves to identify the value created for a single Harvard student's educational experience. 

Harvard employees 7024 administrators, only slightly fewer than the undergraduate population.

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/12/harvard-fact-of-the-day-2.html



#red-tape
#marginal-revolution
#procedural-absurdity
#what-is-wrong-with-academia
#descriptive-data








# people analytics viewed as important as finance

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/best-hr-people-analytics-articles-october-2022-david-green-/

#descriptive-data













# flirting opener

Flirting opener:

"This is a great combination. All black with the light hair on top. Well done." 



#social-animal












# matt mckuskter philosophy

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PnOlz-l9YoI

To connect to another human, you have to honestly relate to him. You have to be able to say, "this is how I really feel about things." This is what people are after more than anything. We are living in a time where this ideology is no longer allowing this level of human connection. Bad things are going to come.

Extreme achievers lack certain aspects of connection. So, they try to be like, "well if I was this thing, then I could dictate the terms of my connections." They try to surround themselves with titles. You live your whole life to set up your relationships, "now they'll like me." 

Just honestly relate to people without doing all that stuff. 


"the points you are going for are just casino tokens. Your point is meaningless. You are collecting virtue points of nothing."


Tell more people that you appreciate them. 



#staring-ceiling
#philosophy
#quote












# louis CK

Comedy is suppossed to be a break from polite talk. There is suppossed to be no moral arrow.
"In my country, I could get out of the car and kill this woman."
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTJXdmJ5cWQ
51:55

Don't let anybody -- especially a producer -- get between you and the form of the joke you know is perfect. 


Every great bit started as a "nobody wants to hear that" joke. 





https://www.youtube.com/shorts/6E2ab_mxC5o


the real truth is in little moments


I try to capture those little moments about how people behave, then you build some bullshit story around it to make a film.



#quote
#staring-ceiling
#philosophy














# humor

0) for every situation, "your honor"

"Your honor I didn't realize..."


a) give stuff tags

"no, I am not on tik tok. That shit is retard juice."

"Just don't answer your phone and the IRS will stop calling. That's white trash meta knowledge."

"I kept calling and leaving voicemails of me singing. Mental warfare baby."

"There were many story lines happening at once with the women I was dating. Welcome to the multiverse of thots."

mental warfare
retard juice
white trash meta knoweldge
multiverse of thots

you're a glorified hall monitor
ever since ronies (corona virus) you've been different




b) call people out by describing their basic functions

[debt collector calls matt and pretends to be a lawyer]
Dude you are not a lawyer.
You are a dude in a cubicle drinking monster energy. You are a telemarketer. Stop flexing bro. You are not high class. 




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8OG-7SF2n4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5G3rlP41t6I


c)

he weighed only 110 pounds, but ten of those pounds came from his magic stick. 


e) matt mckusker:

the new arms race is how many victim buttons can I put on my outfit. 



#humor


















# youtube commenters can catch the OB management bullshit

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-C6XIres43M


what predicts whether the commenters catch the bullshit?
transcript of the exchange
positivity or negativity of the comments


same with woman who spoke with chris williamson
the viewers caught the bullshit





#youtubers-catch-bullshit
#bullshit

















# if something goes wrong, keep your sanity by asking yourself this question...

"did I have good intentions"?


#philosophy
#staring-ceiling














# what speech would you give the philis to pump them up before the baseball game?

dudes, bring it in. bring it in. 
hey,
hey everyone
come in
let's go boys stop fucking around
alright, now I know we aren't doing well
Juan take your headphones off
Juan take your headphones off
I'm not yelling. No, I didn't raise my voice. 
Well if you'd let me finish and shut the fuck up. 


#humor


















# 9 strategies to control your time

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ff12RsvjdPc


#to-watch








# university whistleblower on woke psychiatry

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gcfxiASvLbI


#to-watch










# man vs woman decisions

take two couples, couple a and couple b, a man and a woman
in couple a, the man makes all of the decisions for a year
in couple b, the woman makes all of the decisions for a year
which couple comes out on top?


#social-animal













# ob notes

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CHBbhyqiDUc

https://www.learn-mlms.com/01-module-1.html


#to-watch





# to read

https://www.amazon.com/Story-Testosterone-Hormone-Dominates-Divides/dp/1250236061/ref=sr_1_1?crid=33PC0GV4JRQ9W&keywords=the+story+of+testosterone&qid=1667420498&qu=eyJxc2MiOiIxLjQzIiwicXNhIjoiMS4zMyIsInFzcCI6IjEuNDkifQ%3D%3D&sprefix=the+story+of+testosterone%2Caps%2C129&sr=8-1


#to-read











# quote

Your boos mean nothing. I've seen what you cheer for. 

arthur schopenhauer

The clever are not so much looking for loneliness as they are trying to avoid the fuss created by fools. 


things are terrible. they will get better in time. it will take a long time
it is a competitive advantage to not have a competitive mindset


You need to understand the principles of life.
Then you need to live beyond them.  


#philosophy
#staring-ceiling













# explanation / mechanism / edge notes

racism/antiracism and individual vs collective success
- cooperation lit: defector wins within groups, but group with more Ds loses
- anti-racist scholar wins, and our field's departments now focus on the criteria of allocating black and under-represented minorities to particular positions. As a field and as a country, we will be less innovative and less competitive. The big competition used to be scientific accuracy and rigor. The big competition now is whether you cite enough black people and talk about opression in your paper. 


#edge














https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=61GJ5lQ_1Ow
46 27 for some reason, people in academia find it rude to write a paper saying "this is wrong."


#what-is-wrong-with-academia






# what it means to be a mature adult

Emotional maturity. 
You are an adult when you recognize these things...

1. There’s an underlying fear and anxiety to people who express bad behavior. You develop compassion for them and realize the world isn’t full of inherently bad people
2. You learn how to communicate your feelings and intentions for people to understand
3. You can admit your mistakes and take responsibility for them
4. You build confidence by realizing that everyone is just as scared, stupid and lost as you are.
5. You realize your parents inflicted pain on you because they are also suffering from their own issues. Anger towards them turns to pity and compassion 
6. You know not to confront loved ones yet when you or they are undergoing stress
7. You don’t harbor resentment for those that hurt you. You tell them what hurt, and if they get it, you forgive them. If they don’t get it, you forgive them too in a different way.
8. You aren’t obsessed with making your life perfect
9. You have a calmer, more forgiving and more patient approach to life
10. You see that everyone’s certain weaknesses in character have counterbalancing strengths, and look at the bigger picture than one side of the scale. You know that nobody is perfect
11. You find it harder to fall in love with people because you learn everyone is hard to deal with personally.
12. You know You’re also a difficult person to live with.
13. You forgive yourself for past mistakes. You become your own friend and love yourself
14. You made peace with your childish self, and learned to give it attention by yourself when needed.
15. You appreciate the little pleasures very much.
16. You don’t care what people think of you
17. You are better at receiving feedback and can listen to criticism without feeling threatened
18. You know how to deal with your pains and issues with perspective. You may walk out in nature more, or get a pet, or look at the sky
19. You recognize your past has influenced the way you react to things now, but learned to compensate the distortions that result, by accepting that you tend to exaggerate in certain areas. You learn to hold back your impulses or “first feeling”
20. You see that friendship is more about sharing vulnerability, gaining insight into one another’s troubles and worries


#philosophy
#staring-ceiling
#emotional-maturity











Don't be the man who gains the world but looses his soul. 

#quote



# social animal

tease her, don't interview her
"I used to have bad taste in music too"
"You're sweating, you must have been doing squats in the restroom before I got here"

#social-animal






# humor


I hope you know I've been watching youtube videos on how to rub your feet good. 
Oh if you gave me a moment I'd make it last a lifetime. 

Those clothes do not flatter you at all. Beautiful girl like you deserves a dress or nothing.  I happen to have no dress on me so I recommend we go with nothing. 




[humor; say things in fun ways]
That's all I needed to hear, hell yeah. Give the bull a green light. 


[humor]
do the voice of the person
You know those d-bags who talk about the company like they are an executive.
"Yeah man we just acquired 4 other smaller companies, so we're expanding our product."
Shut up dude, you just look at spreadsheets all day and no one knows you. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4831N5Z9utI
- 15:35

[humor / storytelling]
Give clingers before telling story substance
This event was bad. 
It was the worst thing I had ever experienced.
This thing was career ending bad. 




[humor]
He ran into you and broke your arm?
Shoot...I paid that guy to kill you

I've always wanted to appreciate how you see Italy.
To see Italy through your cold, lifeless eyes




Only a fool...

looks for logic in the chambers of a human heart
wears sneakers like that in the heart of pittsburgh
seeks wisdom and learning at an institution of higher education



You must be wearing that...
to hide that bifurcated devil's tail that hangs off your back side



Thank god your parents aren't here right now...
if they saw you they would die of shame





You me and the devil makes three

If I had a body like that I'd throw my face away


[describe but extrapolate to play the character]
Yeah some guys play the numbers game with women, that doesn't always work. It can turn you into a zombie.
Just out at a bar like
[zombie/depressed/dull voice]
"what's going on? Fuck you."
"what's going on? Fuck you."
"what's going on? Fuck you."



I was really in my happy place with Rick, talking endlessly...
When I'm with you...
spending time...
contemplating who we are...
It is endless torment...


So my GF is here, and she is working on a project.
And I have to say, this project is really turning into something. I love this project. 
People will say, well you are biased because it is your girlfriend.
But I want to make it clear, I am not a fan of my girlfriend. 




* Misdirection : before finishing telling something ask urself “what does my audience expect me to say now” and then say the opposite.

make associations

exaggerate it and make it silly

yes and

do this with everyday objects
do this with everyday events
do this with everyday people walking by



you look like hell
you look like you're ten years old








analogy humor
I have the balls of a roman senator (I want to have sex all the time)
She has the frame of a heroin addict
I have the timidness of a burn victim


she calls you late at night
you just pop up from push ups like "o hey yeah nothing going on"



I wouldn't know who that so-called celebrity is if he walked in the room.

If your mother was here she would die of shame. 


If I could get in the same room as my brother, they would need DNA testing to tell who the body was by the time I got through with him. 




[girl says something dumb]
That sounds like something you heard on one of those vampire shows
That is some shit you watch on vampire shows



[girl says something dumb]
I'm not sure if it was freud or jueng, but the gist is that if you make that statement and tell other people you are really fucking boring
I haven't been sleeping well. So if you could come by and start talking so that I could slip into a coma that would be really good for me. 


[add burg to the end of statement and ask if they are from there]
"I'm bad at golf"
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in non-elite-golf-burgh
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in Pennsylvan-not-good-at-golfs-burgh
"I love sushi"
Oh, I didn't realize you grew up in Pennsylvan-everyone-chick-says-she-loves-sushi-burg


[another example of doing a voice]
https://www.youtube.com/shorts/PuBuZnUnVmc
"the surbaban mother, now larger then life, paces through the playground"



[hit the internet]
"this dude got schizophrenia and then started a youtube channel"
"right, because you know the first thing that comes to mind when I get schizophrenia? time to hit the internet..."
"when I get X, I think...time to hit the..."


[easy misdirection]
academics know two things: big ideas and alcohol

[easy misdirection]
Yes, I have pets...I have 3 dogs and a cat. They are all in the freezer, I'm preparing them for a barbecue next weekend. 

[analogy]
Porn is like coffee for me, it's gotta be black



[say the same thing in lots of different ways: e.g., farts]
this is an exorcism
this is a fart revolution
this is a mutany in the booty
it is the air downstairs saying "we are taking over"
this is a fart that is taking over your body and saying "step aside anal lips"



[you know X is bad when...]
you know your farts are bad when it causes the entire room to leave




#humor

















# social animal


deep conversations
- how did you feel when...
- regret...love...aspirations...happiest/saddist...



[girl grabs her hair or something flirty happens]
my goodness so many dirty images are running through my head right now


#social-animal







# financial rr

how much house can i afford
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HfrqjUKj1uA

busness ideas
- connect grad students to companies for data
- the hill youtube channel for management/ob

#finance









# holding contradictory beliefs

Eric Weinstein’s take on my idea about people having contradictory beliefs in life.
You need to have contradictory facilities in life, and you need to know when to pull on one and when to pull on the other. You need to have both a scarcity and an abundance mindset, but crucially you need to know when to deploy one versus the other. 


#philosophy
#christopher-thinking
#staring-ceiling
#quote


























# Gharbi "diversity training"

https://musaalgharbi.com/2020/09/16/diversity-important-related-training-terrible/


Diversity training doesn't work. Great statement on the difference between "showing that it works on a survey" vs "showing that it actually changes behavior." He also has all kinds of references supporting his paragraphs. 


The limited research suggesting diversity-related training programs as efficacious was based on things like surveys before and after the training, or testing knowledge or attitudes about various groups or policies. And to be clear, the training does help people answer survey questions in the way the training said they ‘should.’ And many people who undergo the training say they enjoyed it or found it helpful in post-training questionnaires. 

However, when scientists set about to investigate whether the programs actually changed behaviors, i.e. do they reduce expressions of bias, do they reduce discrimination, do they foster greater collaboration across groups, do they help with retaining employees from historically marginalized or underrepresented groups, do they increase productivity or reduce conflicts in the workplace — for all of these behavioral metrics, the metrics that actually matter, not only is the training ineffective, it is often counterproductive.  



keywords
- diversity training
- research methods
- io philosophy


#anti-woke
#diversity-training
























# Gharbi "Changes in the demographics of universities"

https://musaalgharbi.com/2020/02/25/heterodox-academy-effective-advocacy/


With respect to gender, co-education was not widespread in the U.S. until the mid-60s and 70s (especially at elite schools). Although sexual discrimination became illegal following the Civil Rights Act of 1964, all the way through the mid-70s there were virtually no protections or remedies for women who were being sexually harassed. Consequently, although women have long been a majority of the U.S. population, they didn’t become a majority of college grads until around 1980. Although their majority among students has continued to climb, women remain underrepresented among faculty – particularly among tenure-track faculty.

Blacks weren’t widely admitted to universities until the 70s (post Civil Rights Act and Affirmative Action). At that time, less than 4% of African Americans had at least a BA degree; today that number is five times higher (although still significantly less than white peers). To this day, African Americans remain hugely underrepresented among faculty.
Although statistically overrepresented in academia today, LGBTQ Americans were not “out” in large numbers until the gay rights movements of the 60s and 70s. Explicitly queer scholarship was not really a ‘thing’ until the 1990s.


Controlling for changes in overall population size, roughly twice as many Americans attend college today as compared to attendance rates even through the 1980s. Most of these increases were from working class and poor Americans due to significant expansions of federal Pell Grant and student loan programs from the mid 60s through the late 70s.


keywords
- college campus demographics


#anti-woke
#diversity-in-college
#university-demographics

























# Giving offense is the price of diversity

https://time.com/5543441/stop-getting-offended/

If you want diversity, you have to be able to take offense. 


keywords
- freedom of speech
- diversity
- college campuses


#anti-woke
#freedom-of-speech
#diversity-requires-take-offense













# Botstein 2018 "Stop the generational moralizing: to defend free speech"


The critique of the principle and practice of free speech by often younger faculty and students goes as follows: Free speech is a dated "liberal" conceit espoused by powerful people, mostly white and older faculty, alumni, and trustees, to maintain their power and sustain the university as an instrument of control and domination. These critics see the university as allied with big business and with government, its primary sources of support. Free speech appears little more than a hypocritical, moralistic rhetorical shield, held by those in control of the status quo. It is seen, therefore, as a seemingly neutral ideal that actually supports a playing field that isn't level in terms of race and class.


The current challenge to free speech can also be traced to the distortion and appropriation of the anti-enlightenment academic discourse that flourished in the 1970s and 1980s. Today's activists who contest the traditions of free speech have absorbed somewhere, out of the ether, a reductive version of the post-positivist epistemological critique of knowledge. They believe there is actually no knowledge in the traditional sense and certainly no truth, and therefore no privileged standpoint that allows conclusions that approach certainty. Truth is subjective, and emanates from the perspective of the viewer, lending legitimacy and authority to subjectivity. Someone told them a distorted fairy tale about Einstein's theory of relativity: that everything is ultimately contingent on perspective, and that there is no priority. Newton may have believed in the validation of hypotheses through proofs and evidence but modern science apparently has debunked that.

The bowdlerizing of modern physics, from Schrodinger's cat and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle to the frame of references in the special theory of relativity, ended up undermining the tools of reason, the principles of argument, and the rules of evidence. Somehow the word got out, in no small measure courtesy of French structural theorists, that all knowledge is a social construct, and that universal objective truths do not exist. The critics of free expression don't believe that there are rational grounds on which to distinguish right from wrong.


But this writer doesn't give advice for how to push against these bad ideas.


Faculty members are great as individuals because they can be different, original, and resist being pigeonholed. And the university needs to protect them. But to control what exceptional individuals say, or even how they behave, cuts against the virtues of deviance. One cannot segment the range and scope of how one is different. 

We--proponents of academic freedom and free speech --need to break out of our own echo chamber and be quite clear that free expression and the habits of critique, skepticism, and rational self-examination are absolutely indispensable. 

BUT HOW?



keywords
- free speech
- college campuses


#free-speech
#defend-free-speech










# 2018 "Think professors are liberal? Try school administrators"

Today, many colleges and universities have moved to a model in which teaching and learning is seen as a 24/7 endeavor. Engagement with students is occurring as much -- if not more -- in residence halls and student centers as it is in classrooms. Schools have increased their hiring in areas such as residential life and student centers, offices of student life and success, and offices of inclusion and engagement.

In these domains, the ratio of liberal or very liveral to conservative is 12 to one. Incoming students don't differ nearly as much on their political ideologies. 


keywords
- political
- ideology
- college campuses


#anti-woke
#liberal-bias
#left-leaning-colleges
#no-conservatives-in-academia























# Soto et al., 2021 “Taking skills seriously”

Success in life is influenced by more than cognitive ability and opportunity. It is also influenced by a person’s capacity to maintain social relationships, regulate emotions, and manage goal-oriented behaviors. 

This is a “call to action” paper that organizes some of these skills.

Personality is what a person tends to to.
Skills are what a person is capable of doing. 

Social engagement: actively engage with others
Cooperation: maintain positive social relationships
Self-management: effectively pursue goals an complete tasks
Emotional resilience: regulate emotions and moods
Innovation: engage with novel ideas and experiences

We don’t know their predictive power. 


keywords
- skills

#intelligence
#skills
#careers
#psych-of-performance












# buying a rental property


monthly home price stuff
mortage: 1600
property tax: about 1.2% of purchase price (one a 400,000 home, it would be 400)
insurance: 100-150 a month
fixes: 400
vacancy: 200


so, to make this worthwhile, you need to make more than this sum per month = cashflow.
Not all properties will cashflow. You have to get it for a low enough price. If the mortgage is super high, then even if you put a huge payment down upfront, it probably won't cashflow. Or, you can buy the home outright and then rent it. 

Look for properties that are structurally sound but need minor cosmetic renovations. What are cheap renovations that look bad but should be easy to handle?
- carpet
- old kitchens
- old bathrooms
- old floors
- old paint or peeling paint inside or outside
- bad landscape
+ these things are easy to fix fast for ~ $30,000
+ doing so will then increase your cashflow by 600 a month
+ use cheap tile floors if you will have tenants, not carpet. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJx7_1rWC6U
15:01

This stuff, on the other hand, you want to be super sound and already paid for:
- roof
- foundation
- plumming
- electrical

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/qsuNXKaLAkU


#finance
#mortgage
#rental-property
#how-to-rent-a-property
















# Sigmund & Ferstl 2021 “Panel Vector Autoreggression in R”

Develop a package for vector autoregression but with large N and short T.

Only show fixed effects approach. “A random effects specification in a dynamic panel context is possible but requires strong assumptions on the individual effects. Empirical applications mostly use a fixed-effects specification.”

keywords
- dynamics
- vector autoregressive modeling


#vector-autoregressive-modeling
#panel-var












# Ferreira et al., 2020 “This place is full of it”

Develop a bullshit scale.

Workplace bullshit:
- when colleagues make statements at work with no regard for the truth
- bullshitters neither know nor care that what they communicate is false

In response, colleagues can make six actions
- exit: excape the bullshit
- voice: confront the bullshit
- loytalty: embrace and spread the bullshit
- neglect: disengage from the bullshit



Organizational Bullshit perception Scale
- 3 factors

(1) Regard for truth

culture of using evidence to support statements

(as oppossed to anecdotes, personal experiences, and opinions)

Degree to which the org tolerates people with no regard for the truth.

items
- Evidence must be presented to support decisions made (R)
- People often make assertions that they cannot support
- It is easy to get access to the data I need to make good decisions (R)
- When making decisions we place more emphasis on evidence than on personal opinions (R)
- You can persuade people to do things even if the evidence doesn’t support your arguments
- People take the time to gather and analyze data before making decisions (R)
- If you want to get ahead just keep insisting that everything is going great, even if the evidence says something different


(2) The Boss

Extent to which leader engages in bullshit behavior

items
- My boss will say whatever it takes to pursue their agenda
- When my boss speaks, they usually back up their opinions with logic (R)
- My boss often says things that may or may not be true
- Even when people dont’ know what they are talking about, my boss will often go along with their suggestions


(3) Bullshit language

What is said and how things are said.

items
- My boss loves to use acronyms
- My boss loves to use jargon
- People use jargon far too often
- People use acronyms far too often





keywords
- item development
- scale development
- bullshit scale


#measurement
#bullshit-scale



















# welsh et al “the slippery slope: how small ethical”

good example of how write a hook in the following style
- concept X is popular in the media and logical
- but no research yet exists on X
- we study it




#ob-notes
#hook-notes
#jap-notes
#jap
















# Rogers 2020 “Beating your Neighbor to the Berry Patch”

Great example of developing a fundamental model. Her is an example situation. This situation is an example of something fundamental. Now develop a model of it. 

“Every summer, my backyard witnesses a conflict between humans and birds, all of whom wish to eat the same strawberries. Those who wait until the berries are ripe eat none, for by then the others have come and gone. All of us eat sour berries or none at all, and none of us are happy about it.

Such interactions are common in nature. They occur whenever

1. Several individuals compete for the same resource

2. The resource improves in value over time

3. Some cost is involved in attempting to harvest the resource whether one succeeds in harvesting it or not.

4. Harvesting the resource ruins it for those who come later. 


keywords
- optimal foraging
- resource dillemma
- philsophy of science
- models


#phil-of-science
#formal-modeling
#formal-models
#optimal-foraging




















# Smaldino on the philosophy of science in psychology

https://www.stitcher.com/show/bjks-podcast/episode/8-paul-smaldino-cubist-chickens-formal-models-and-the-psychology-curriculum-80679525

keywords
- philosophy of science
- modeling
- formal models



#phil-of-science
#formal-models

















# Yarkoni 2021 “The generalizability crisis”

Turning statements into mathematical or statistical forms deserves as much care as operationalizing constructs. 

Most of us are comfortable with construct validity:

Suppose I hy- pothesize that high social status makes people behave dishonestly. If I claim that I can test this hypothesis by randomly assigning people to either read a book or watch television for 10 minutes, and then mea- suring their performance on a speeded dishwashing task, nobody is going to take me very seriously. It doesn’t even matter how the results of my experiment turn out: there is no arrangement of numbers in a table, no p-value I could compute from my data, that could possibly turn my chosen experimental manipu- lation into a sensible proxy for social status. And the same goes for the rather questionable use of speeded dishwashing performance as a proxy for dishonesty.

Now take that absurdity and apply it to using statistical models.

The absurdity of the preceding example exposes a critical assumption that often goes unnoticed: for an empirical result to have bearing on a verbal assertion, the measured variables must be suitable operational- izations of the verbal constructs of interest, and the relationships between the measured variables must parallel those implied by the logical structure of the verbal statements. Equating the broad construct of honesty with a measure of speeded dishwashing is so obviously nonsensical that we immediately reject such a move out of hand. What may be less obvious is that exactly the same logic implicitly applies in virtually every case where researchers lean on statistical quan- tities to justify their verbal claims. Statistics is not, as many psychologists appear to view it, a rote, me- chanical procedure for turning data into conclusions.

It is better understood as a parallel, and more precise, language in which one can express one’s hypotheses or beliefs. Every statistical model is a description of some real or hypothetical state of affairs in the world. If its mathematical expression fails to capture roughly the same state of affairs as the verbal hypothesis the researcher began with, then the statistical quantities produced by the model cannot serve as an adequate proxy for the verbal statements—and consequently, the former cannot be taken as support for the latter. 


keywords
- philosphy of science
- verbal theory
- verbal vs formal theory


#phil-of-science
#formal-models
#verbal-vs-formal-theory





















# Prentice 2012 “Liberal norms and their discontents”

The strong liberal norms that characterize personality and social psychology have insidious effects on research in the field. Specifi- cally, they predispose PSPs to achieve consensus on many fundamentals in their view of human nature: the power of situ- ational influences on behavior, the significance of unconscious biases, and the importance of self-determination, to name just a few. Given the field’s ideological homogeneity and the norms that exaggerate that homogeneity, few PSPs ever encounter a colleague committed to a view of human nature that privileges personal responsibility, good manners, and material definitions of success.

Taking seriously conservative points of view would go a long way toward bringing renewed vitality to fundamental questions in personality and social psychology, giving voice to conservative PSPs, and signaling to conservative students that the field has a place for them.

To explain why there are few conservatives in Academia, most psychologists…

cite the properties of conservatives that make them ill-suited to or uninterested in a career in personality and social psychology: Their comparatively high scores on authoritarianism and social domi- nance orientation and low scores on openness to experience, their interest in careers that provide access to money and power, their anti-intellectualism and bias against science 



keywords
- left bias in academia
- woke
- conservative bias in academia

#anti-woke
#no-conservatives-in-academia
#left-bias




















# Evolutionary and Social Psychological Perspectives on Human Cooperation

In Ziegler-Hill 2015 “Evolutionary Perspectives on Social Psychology”

Prentice & Sheldon

Book chapter on cooperation

They idea that humans are purely self-interested does not stand up against research
- Henrich et al., 2005
- Caporael et al., 1989

Typical evolution of cooperation stuff. What allows for the evolution of cooperators?

Then they have a section on psychological (proximate) effects that produce cooperation:

Individual differences
- social value orientation: prosocials, individualsists, and competitors
++ van Lange & Van Doesum, 2012
++ Balliet et al., 2009
++ Messick and McClintock, 1968
++ Au & Kwong, 2004
- prosocials tend toward decisions that emphasize joint gain
- individualists tend to maximize personal gain without regard for others
- competitors maximize distance between self and other

Situational
- punishment (Yamagishi, 1986)
- rewards for cooperation
- time
++ give groups time to establish cooperative norms (Weber & Murningham, 2008)
++ get people to focus on long-term consequences (Kortenkamp & Moore, 2006)
++ people have to take time to figure out who is a cooperator (Sheldon et al., 2000)


keywords
- cooperation
- personality & social psychology cooperation



#cooperation
#evolution-of-cooperation













# Sheldon & McGregor 2000 “Extrinsic Value Orientation and the tragedy of the commons”

Awesome “between vs within group” effect in cooperation.

Bring students into a lab and have them play tragedy of the commons games. Some groups have many “cooperators” (they call them ‘intrinsic’ — value self-acceptance, intimacy, and community), other groups have many “moneyers” (‘extrinsically’ motivated people — they value money, fame, and popularity).

Within groups, extrinsically oriented people harvested more than intrinsically oriented persons. But between-groups, groups with more intrinsics (or cooperators) yielded greater average harvests because their individuals didn’t deplete the resource fast and thus they survived and kept harvesting for a longer period of time. 


keywords
- cooperation
- within vs between group effect
- collective performance


#cooperation
#collective-action
#collective-performance
#value-orientation
#motivation
#within-between














# Smaldino “How to build a strong theoretical foundation”

We need formal models. We need training in computational thinking. “I can clearly see the value in this sort of modeling. In psychology, we receive zero training in how to even think like this.” What can we do?

#### Interdisciplinary thinking
- what is the function of the thing I am studying? (evolution)
- what are the evolutionary benefits of the thing I am studying? (evolution)
- what emergent phenomena are at play? (complexity)
- what if everyone acts like this? (complexity)

Example he uses:

Social psychologist finds that people group up around norms. They then believe that those norms are the way things ought to be. He proposed an intervention to help people realize that other people have different norms.

Smaldino’s points:
What societal benefit does following norms offer?
What are the consequences of having a society comprised entirely of free thinkers?

This idea, though, [christopher writing now] is counter to Simon. Simon says that we can study things in isolation. “You cannot form strong theory without understanding social, cultural, and biological effects. You cannot understand complex processes without some understanding of how complex dynamics unfold.”


#### technical skills

Need computational and mathematical training. 

Statistical models are not theoretical models of how processes are generated. Developing the latter sort of model takes different skilsl than does the former. 

You have to allow people to be pure theorists. 


#### philosophical scrutiny

We need to be much more open to this: “leaving out the appropriate things to best answer our questions, and whether our questions are the best ones we can be asking”





keywords
- philosphy of science
- modeling


#formal-models
#phil-of-science




















# anita's research ideas

Anita riffing compared to Nikos riffing:
Anita: people in orgs struggle with X. How do we improve X?
Nikos: the literature assumes X. X is wrong or incomplete because...


we know that making decisions by having a big group talk live is awful.
we need processes that facilitate engagement, satisfaction, proper decision making (in asynchronous settings like zoom). In remote, asynchronous contexts, how do you make this happen?


integrating frameworks also means building mediation boxes and arrows.
I had only ever imagined "integrating" to mean moderator. Integrating can also mean
x -> y from theory 1
y -> z from theory 2. Integrate to get x -> y -> z. 

In OB and micro psych, we care a lot about jingle jangle fallacy. In macro, they do not care at all. Look at all the different scales for organizational learning climate. 



#anita-research-ideas
#anita-research-idea










# wages are not keeping up with inflation, except for the super wage earners

imgs/wages-with-inflation




#economics
#marginal-revolution
#wages
#pay
#income
#salary
#inflation












# cbt and mindfulness and victimology

Mindful -> notice thoughts
CBT -> re-orient distorted thinking


Victim stance: imagining myself as the victim when I am held accountable for irrational actions or beliefs. 


#anti-woke

















# conversation

push pull (innocent and put together but devil)
tease
qualify (what makes you)
astrology-like (so you're like super creative)


#flirt-opener














# looking for racism in everything

imgs/weird-colonialism

#anti-woke














# colleges starting to realize their "be the change you want" is backfiring

Now, they are using the phrase

"Be the [mindfully grounded] change you want to see in the world"

imgs/grounded-change


#anti-woke












# high potential employee from HR blog is just positive psychology bs

How about something like this, "to what extent does the employee think and write clearly?" If so, he/she is a high potential employee.

Christopher's opinion:
high potential employees have super good skills and are nice, level-headed people. But they need not have all of these crazy positive qualities.

imgs/where-is-think-clearly






















# twitter handles to follow


Gov data look up
https://www.researchdatagov.org/


https://medium.com/data-science-at-microsoft/ten-podcasts-for-data-scientists-to-subscribe-to-e7ff0caf2d0


https://www.inverse.com/science

Scholar Follow List

@KambhampatiPat
https://www.thefp.com/p/how-dei-is-supplanting-truth-as-the?r=3pk3h&utm_medium=ios&utm_campaign=post

@shannimcg

@Musa_alGharbi

@DG_Rand
 
@victorerikray
 
@cwarshaw
 
@profjennabednar

@hjghassell

@ejfagan

@cstewartiii

@SamaraKlar
 
@mjbsp
 
@prowag

@emilythorson

@sobieraj
 
@meredithconroy_
 
@ElectProject
 
@rachel__porter

@kmmunger




Follow Friday List
@OlufemiOTaiwo

@lastpositivist

@DKThomp

@zeynep

@robkhenderson

@semaforben

@emollick

@SamAdlerBell

@RichardHanania

@mattyglesias

@shadihamid

@MazMHussain


Interesting Tweeters
@AmnaUncensored

@NairYasmin

@NicoleBarbaro

@MattThomasNYC

@MattPolProf

@samhaselby

@GutkinLen

@DavidRozado

@tomstello_

@blejksmith

@_alice_evans

@kenanmalik

@njhochman

@olivertraldi

@MattGrossmann

@RichardvReeves

@Bernstein
 
@rafiazakaria



#twitter
#follow-on-twitter
#handles






















# Boyd & Mathew, “Arbitration supports reciprocity when the “

Reciprocity is undermined by perceptions errors, or when one partner mistakenly thinks that his partner defected. If perception errors are minimal, then strategies like generous tit for tat are useful. 

But what about when many perception errors exist?
- they propose using a third party to tell people when others cooperated


keywords
- cooperation


#cooperation
#perception-errors













# Kauffman, 1970 “Articulation of parts explanation in biology and the rational”

You can articulate something in an infinite number of ways. You can decompose its parts in an infinite number of ways. For any research, you should define what the purpose of the thing you are studying is. Then, you articulate parts. Then, you articulate causal relations.


The punchline:
- you don’t have to study everything when you study X
- define your purpose, and study that which is necessary


keywords
- philosophy of science

#phil-of-science

















# Eisenberg 1984 “Ambiguity as strategy in organizational communication”

Most encourage clarity. He argues that ambiguity is useful. People in orgs may use ambiguity to strategically accomplish their goals.

1) unified diversity

A challenge for collectives: allow individuals freedom, but maintain coordination among the collective. Maximize both individuality and community. 

An org can accomplish this by using ambiguous symbols. Ambiguous values. Offer a sense of unity. It is not the case that people are moved toward the same views but rather that the ambiguous statement of core values allows them to maintain individual interpretations while at the same time believing that they are in agreement.

He even points to a reference saying that precise goals don’t help collectives (Edelman, 1977; Political langauge: Words that succeed and policies that fail)



2) ambiguity allows for strategic change

If an organization has a goal that is ambiguous, then the organization can keep the same goal but alter its operations and avoid operations which have become maladaptive over time. 
- so, you used to behave with X, but X went out of style. 

When air travel replaced sea travel from the US to Europe, those cruise lines that survived did so because they defined their goals broadly as entertainment or hospitality, not narrowly as transportation. In this case, an ambiguous goal allowed these organizations to adapt by providing new types of services. This characteristic of ambiguity is especially important to organizations in turbulent environments, in which ambiguous goals can preserve a sense of continuity while allowing for the gradual change in interpretation over time.

Similarly, if I’m a leader and I’m ambiguous to you, I give you an opportunity to project your own meaning into my statements, so you might perceive greater similarity and attraction which facilitates relational development.

Also, if you are a leader and you set a clear policy, then your best performer might violate that policy. You don’t want to puninsh your best performer. If you set an ambiguous policy, then you can deny that such behavior was wrong.







keywords
- clarity
- ambiguity is strategic


#organizational-performance
#strategy
#ambiguity-is-good
#ambiguity-is-strategic












# Flore et al., 2018 “The influence of gender stereotype threat on”

Study stereotype threat in real settings. No effect. Doesn’t replicate.

keywords
- stereotype threat
- no effect



#anti-woke
#stereotype-threat-no-effect













# Inbar & Lammers, 2012 “Political Diveristy in Social and Personality Psychology”

Professors are willing to discriminate against conservatives in hiring.

Psych people are extremely left wing. Openly willing to discriminate against conservatives in paper reviews, grant reviews, and hiring. 


keywords
- liberal bias in academia
- conservative bias
- lefty academia
- woke


#anti-woke
#no-conservatives-in-academia
#lefty-academia
#discrimination




















# “Crossing the rubicon from the social to the biological sciences”

Really great review of charles murray’s diversity book.

Big points:
- males and females differ in interests
- males and females differ in personality, abilities, and social behavior
- the shared environment plays a minor role in explaining social behavior
- the unshared, random environment plays a large role in explaining social behavior


keywords
- charles murrary review
- randomness
- unshared environment


#charles-murray-review
#randomness
#unshared-environment
















# Arnold 2013 “Simulation models of the evolution of cooperation”

At best such simulations can claim to prove logical possibilities, i.e. they prove that certain phenomena are possible as the consequence of the modeling assumptions built into the simulation, but not that they are possible or can be expected to occur in reality. I suggest several requirements under which proofs of logical possibilities can nevertheless be considered useful. Sadly, most Axelrod-style simulations do not meet these requirements. I contrast this with Schelling's neighborhood segregation model, the core mechanism of which can be retraced empirically.


Simulations are “proofs of concept.”

Axelrod’s simulations aren’t great because they don’t refute anything.

Schelling simulation is great because it shows that you don’t need racists to get what appears to be a racist outcome. 
- his model proves the logical possibility of segregated neighborhoods to be the result of individual choices which are based on preferences that are not at all unfavorable to integrated neighborhoods. 


See also, “What’s wrong with social simulations” and “How Models Fail” by Arnold
- basically, he likes schelling’s model because it has some connection to reality

keywords
- simulations
- formal modeling



#formal-models
#simulations
#evolution-of-cooperation




















# Kraiger & Ford, 2021 "The Science of Workplace Instruction: Learning"

What people in IO do:
- what individual and organizational factors predict whether people learn something?

What learning psychologists do:
- given what we know about learning, how should you instruct/teach?

List of "instructional events" that have empirical support
- testing effect
- generate
- right level of difficulty
- spacing
- state clear objectives so that learners see a connection to future work
- rehearsal, repetition, and attention

What doesn't work/matter
- learning styles
- mode of delivery
- age



"The science of workplace instruction postulates that instructional events managed by the organization lead to learning events and learning outcomes within individuals which are manifested as instructional outcomes at the organizational level."
- ugh

"The science of workplace instruction postulates that learning is facilitated by the sound application of instructional principles and delivery."
- so broad you effectively say nothing
- if you do what we know will work, then it will work


keywords
- learning
- workplace learning
- training
- development
- bad writing



#learning
#bad-writing
#testing-effect
#academese
























# Burum, Nowak, & Hoffman, 2020 “An evolutionary explanation for ineffective altruism”

People give to charity but they don’t care about the effectiveness of their giving. Why? Because social rewards for giving reinforce giving but not giving effectively.


When we spend money on a weekend trip or a new coat,
we attend to the value that we are getting for our money;
we weigh alternatives, read reviews, ask our friends for
advice and are sensitive to price differentials. In contrast, when we
donate time and money to charities, efficiency matters surprisingly little1–3
. Americans, for instance, donate about 2% of the gross
domestic product4
 and volunteer over 7 billion hours a year5
 for
charities that show little correlation between impact and popularity6,7
, despite immense differences in cost effectivenes8–10. Studies
also find that respondents are insensitive to the scope of need, willing to pay the same, for instance, to save 2,000 as to save 200,000
birds from an oil spill11. And field studies indicate that we often do
not donate more when our charitable contributions are matched at
higher rates12,13. All of this raises the fundamental puzzle: why are
we motivated to give but not motivated to give effectively?

Why do people reward giving but not efficacy? In evolutionary models, the following criteria are crucial for maintaining good behavior: what counts as good must be (1) well defined, (2) easy to observe, and (3) different people’s assessments must be correlated. Only then can third parties agree on who did good and reward him or her. Giving effectively, compared to merely giving, is liable to fail on all three of these criteria. 

These ideas are born out in experiments. Rewarders are sensitive to whether someone gives but not to effectiveness or other variables that are difficult to observe. Other experiments show that when people make saving decisions they attend to efficacy, but when they make charity decisions they do not attend to efficacy. 


keywords
- cooperation
- good opening argument
- clear writing


#cooperation
#grad-reading
#evolution-of-cooperation























# Giruge, Whillians, & West, 2020 “Why time poverty matters for individuals, organizations, and nations”

Time poverty: people report having too many things to do and not enough time.

keywords
- motivation
- time 


#motivation
#time-poverty
























# Cohen, Levinthal, & Warglien "Collective performance: modeling the interaction of..."

A paper about creating a formal model of the sequences of actions people take in organizations. Can't make heads or tails of it. Very abstract. Something about "actions coordinate in some way," but I can't follow their definitions. 

Very confusing writing.


keywords
- confusing
- collective performance



#academese
#collective-action
#collective-performance














# Lowery, Clark, & Carter, 2021 "The balancing act of performance: psychometric networks"

Tricky network vector autoregression approach. In a typical network study, people are nodes. In this study, items are nodes. 

"Majority of significant outgoing ties were relations among the same constructs"
- so, OCB predicts OCB
- CWB predicts CWB

Among different OCB CWB items, there was evidence of between-construct relations.
- "assisting others with their duties (OCB) predicted saying hurtful things to others (CWB)"
- "day-dreaming (CWB) predicted courtesy toward others (OCB)"

So, OCBs and CWBs have inertia, they demonstrate cross lag relationships, but there are many individual differences in the size of the relationships, which items are related, and and the baseline of each.


keywords
- OCBs
- CWBs
- Networks


#ocbs
#networks

















# wang "expertise diversity of teams predicts originality..."

https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_citation&hl=en&user=uQJAkBoAAAAJ&sortby=pubdate&citation_for_view=uQJAkBoAAAAJ:EPG8bYD4jVwC



The effects of diversity on team performance depend on time-span of outcome performance.

Teams of diverse experts have no significant advantage over homogenous teams in the short term. Instead, 


[christopher note]
Short term performance vs long-term performance.
Remember that insight. Is your DV performance now or performance over the long run?


#diversity-in-teams
#science-of-science
#teams
#short-termism
#dv-performance-length
#performance




















# Cronin & Weingart, 2019 "Conflict across representational gaps"

Diversity of thought causes conflict. Although conflict can yield innovation, if often only leads to disagreement, poor communication, and relational issues (De Dreu & Weingart, 2003; de Wit, Greer, & Jehn, 2012). When you communicate with people from diverse perspectives, you have to recognize that people have different assumptions. They have different ways of viewing the world. 


1)) why diverse groups have rgaps (people have misalgined assumptions)

Incompatible assumptions disrupt understanding. Even if we witness the same data, we're likely to reach vastly different conclusions or not understand it.

"Profits are down this quarter so there may be layoffs" is assumed to be an accounting problem to accountants, a marketing problem to marketers, and a management problem to managers.

Sometimes the gap stems from an expert having way more background knowledge than a novice. Sometimes the gap stems from experts in different fields having non-overlapping evidence. See left paragraph on page 7644 for cool examples. Sometimes, the gap stems from people having incompatible assumptions about the world. 


2)) rgaps could be used to innovate

Cognitive integration is the degree to which one can translate between perspectives and thus, understand the intended meaning of what others communicate. It is not about agreement, it is about understanding one's position. 

3)) but instead, rgaps often create misunderstanding and conflict

What should be a debate over how to understand information becomes an argument about who is right and who is wrong, or about why someone's knowledge is irrelevant. 

4)) how to use affective integration to mitigate 1-3

AI: liking, trust, and respect for another. You have to be positive and open to the other person. 

Those are the things that have to occur. But no information on how to ensure that they do.



keywords
- conflict resolution
- experts not understanding the position of novices
- diversity
- debate


#conflict
#diversity
#conflict-resolution























# Langridge, Franks, & Franks, 2004 "Improvement in collective performance with experience"

The collective performance of an ant colony improves substantially when it experiences the same task multiple times. But, if the interval between performance episodes is too long, then the effect goes away.

So, this is a primative form of memory or learning, or repetitive experience. Ants don't remember the task. They don't have a cognitive system to remember what they did. But somehow performance is better on trial 2 and 3.

Task
- ants have to move from nest A to B
- the terrain that they have to move over is the same across trials
- slow on trial 1, fast on trial 2, superfast on trial 3

So, somehow that information is getting encoded, even though ants don't have memory.


keywords
- platt strong test
- collective performance
- collective learning
- ants
- performance in the aggregate


#collective-learning
#aggregate-function
#collective-performance
#collective-action











# Langridge, Franks, & Franks, 2008 "How experienced individuals contribute to an"

"Certain groups of organisms are capable of improving their collective performance with experience. In a recent study, we demonstrated that, over successive emigrations, colonies of ants are able to improve their collective performance by reducing the time taken to complete an emigration. In this paper, we analyze individual behaviors to understand some of the ways in which time gains were achieved."

the key behaviors:
- transporter ants that participated in prior emigrations...
++ begin emigration on the current trial faster
++ transported more items on the current trial

SO, HOW DO YOU IMPROVE THE PERFORMANCE OF A COLLECTIVE?
- some say you need better social organization, or cohesion
- BUT YOU COULD ALSO JUST EXPOSE THE COLLECTIVE TO MULTIPLE EXPERIENCES
++ allow individuals to naturally increase their own efficiency with experience



This study also makes me think about "how individual behaviors aggregate"
- the behavior that drove whether collective performance changed was the timing of the transporter ant
- so, in this example, many ants create collective performance, but the transporter ant was the individual who could change the performance of the collective.
- many ants combine to yield collective performance. But the transporter ant was the most important. 




keywords
- collective performance
- learning
- adaptation
- aggregating
- performance in the aggregate
- ants



#aggregating-function
#collective-performance
#collective-action































# Cronin & George, 2020 "The why and how of the integrative review"

Purposes of different research approaches:

1) adjucate

Find out if a position is true
- does task conflict predict performance?
- which features of composition most reliably affect performance?

Best suited for meta analyses or systematic reviews

To do this, you have to have studies that examine similar problems with similar constructs and measures.

2) redirect

Propose a new perspective on a topic. 
- the negotiation literature should break out of its experimental nature
- organizational change needs to be studied from the perspective of individual decision makers

More about asking different questions than finding different answers. 

Best suited for theory or narrative reviews.

3) the integrative review

Gathering what is known about a topic from a variety of different communities of practice and juxtapose these perspectives to spawn new areas of research. 

It is primarily a tool for redirection. It also builds bridges across communities.

In a adjucation paper, you look for every study that's been published on the X Y relationship. In an integrative paper, you look for one paper on the X Y relationship from each conceptual domain. 



keywords
- grad philosophy
- writing reviews

#grad-reading






























# Cronin, 2015 "Advancing the science of dynamics in groups and teams"

"The proportion of research that uses tools to examine dynamics remains disappointing. Why? An answer I favor is that even if we desire to study groups as dynamic, and even if we have new tools for doing so, there is still a mental challenging to conceiving such studies. We have to be able to imagine how we might model and design our investigations to capture dynamics, and that requires a different mindset from the ones that most of us use."

editorial

keywords
- dynamics
- static
- nobody knows what dynamics is



#dynamics



































# Shuffler & Cronin, 2019 "The challenges of working with 'real' teams"

Good citation for anything related to "teams are complex"

Teams today are no longer defined by stable members
"Teams are ubiquitous in organizations, yet work contexts now make traditional teams -- those that have identifiable boundaries, stable membership, and members who belong only to that single team -- a rarity. Teamwork has evolved along with work itself, making the traditional means of studying and validating team experiences (e.g., agreement statistics) inadequate. Yet is is not merely that current measures are antiquated, many of the assumptions about teams themselves are no longer correct."

Teams today have complex operating procedures
"Construction teams that build hospitals have a common and complex structure. To reach the end goal of a functional facility, a large number of individuals must work together efficiently yet safely, completing mentally and physically demanding tasks for days, weeks, months, or even years. These construction projects are typically composed of three subteams: owners, architects, and builders. Each subteam will have specialists who come from different organizations that may be spread out across multiple geographical locations. Members routinely rotate in and out of the team, as do different functions over the life of the project. As such, most people are working on multiple projects over time and have experiences with each other across different projects."

keywords
- team

#teams-are-complex
#future-of-work
























# Cronin & Bezrukova, 2019 "Conflict management through the lens of system dynamics"

It's necessary to add a systems dynamics lens to the study of conflict.

## Dynamics in conflict research

How conflict constructs are studied
- many examine different "types" of conflict (task, cognitive, interpersonal, etc.)
- many examine effects at a single period

He makes a big point to separate what he calls states and processes. 
- state: variable (power, satisfaction, collective climate)
- process: action or event (sending an email, attending to Q, behaving, performing, interpreting, listen to one another)

How time is involved in conflict research

Some longitudinal studies, but no justification for sampling period. 
No one said, "We used 3 minute periods because that is how long it usually takes for people to realize that the confederate is disagreeing with them."
No one said, "We surveyed group members each hour because that is how long it takes for the negative affect to dissipate."

They just ask people questions about conflict over some random interval, like every day or every week. 

This is an issue because states and processes are conflated in our questions. "How much relationship tension is there" could be a question about a state. "How often do people get angry" could be a question about a process. "How much conflict is there" could mean either. "How much conflict" mixes state and process.
- because states and processes are mixed, you cannot separate how states emerge from processes
- I WOULD CALL PROCESSES EVENTS. 

WHY STAGE MODELS ARE NOT DYNAMICS
Saying that "x relates positively to y in stage A but negatively to y in stage B" is not dynamics. "The reason this still does not capture dynamics is that period is defined in terms of the group's development (i.e., stage). Such dynamics are superficial because the change over time is not engogenous, rather it is spurred by a force outside the states beind studied (x and y). True dynamics are only understood when research can specify how earlier conflict affects later conflict, not merely that conflict can change."

EVEN WHEN YOU HAVE LONGITUDINAL DESIGNS, IT DOESN'T GIVE YOU DYNAMICS
"28% were longitudinal, yet only 10 of the 53 longitudinal studies had the potential to identify dynamic change in conflict. Such change is identifieable only if prior conflict predicts future conflict, and very few studies actually had that."

OUR RESEARCH APPROACHES THROW DYNAMICS INTO THE BACKGROUND
"Often it is simply because there is no way to ascertain change over time when one examines a single period. This does not mean conflict did not transform, just that there was no means to analyze how. But even when there are multiple periods, and even when people consider how moves affect episodes and periods, the methods of analysis shunt dynamics into the background. The best example if Paletz et al., (2011) study, which had all of the ingredients needed to test hypotheses about conflict dynamics, yet their resulting models and hypotheses were still about static relationships (e.g., H2 states that micro conflict with positive affect is more likely to be resolved). When time is included, (e.g., H4 stated that teams with early success would have less TC and PC), time was merely a moderator that still had a fixed relationship to conflict."


## Systems Dynamics

"A system is dynamic (as opposed to fixed or chaotic) if there is some regularity in the pattern of change over time."

Most OB research puts elements and processes into a box-and-arrow model of antecedents, mediators, and moderators. "Linear causality is inhospitaable to understanding dynamics because time is crudely represented -- there is not way to represent endogenous change."

"What makes a system dynamic as opposed to simply 'variable' is the capacity for endogenous change -- processes within the system cause that system's state to change over time. For instance, what happens on round 1 of a PD game affects choices on round 2 even when nohting else in that conflict situation changes."
- feedback and inertia are key


States or constructs are typically stocks. Behaviors or actions are typically flows. That being said, you can conceive of any construct or variable as a stock or a flow (see Table 2). 

Systems often evolve toward some states but not others (attractors). 

"The behavior of a system arises from its structure, feedback loops, stocks and flows, and the interaction between the structure and the decision making processes of the agents acting within it" (Sterman, 2000). 


## Guidelines to using SDynamics to broadening conflict research

Basically, you want to change your lens from studying fragments of a system to the causal chains that are simultaneous within the system. 

Your selection of what to include in your system should not be based on what is presumed to have a large effect, but with what is necessary given your question. 

Pay attention to events or variables that limit a systems growth and drive it toward equilibria. Self-reinforcing loops that produce chaos are cues that the current explanation is incomplete. 

Remember, a flow into a stock is much different from a flow out of a stock. "Shutting an inflow merely slows the growth in a stock, it does not empty it. A faucet only fills the tub; the drain only empties it. What causes a factor to rise need not be the same as what causes a factor to fall."

Think about timescale. Think about how long the effect lasts before it dissapates. Think about how long it takes for an effect to emerge. 

YOU CANNOT INTERVENE ON A STOCK, BUT THAT'S ALL WE WRITE ABOUT IN OUR PRACTICAL IMPLICATION SECTIONS. 
"The stocks dictate the state of the system, but the flows are what control it as they affect the stocks causally."
So, when we say in our practical implication sections "have trust on your teams for optimal performance, and have cohesion too." Those are states. Those are stocks. Those don't tell anyone what to actually do.





keywords
- conflict
- dynamics


#dynamics
#conflict










# social animal



deep conversations
- how did you feel when...
- regret...love...aspirations...happiest/saddist...



[girl grabs her hair or something flirty happens]
my goodness so many dirty images are running through my head right now



















# matt mckuskter philosophy

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PnOlz-l9YoI


To connect with another human being, you have to honestly relate to them. You have to be able to say, "this is how I really feel about things." 

People want human connection more than anything.

We're living in a time when people are not able to speak this way to one another. 

Extreme achievers lacked certain aspects of connection, so they try to become something so that they can dictate relationship terms. You live your whole life to set all your relationships up so you're like, "now they'll like me." 

Human connection + extreme high achievers try to make up for lost connections. 



#christopher-thinking
#quote
#podcast
#staring-ceiling

















# Dornhaus, Holley, & Franks, 2009 "Larger colonies do not have more specialized workers in the ant XXX"

Social insects demonstrate amazing cooperation and coordination. Yet, many individuals (>50% at any period) tend to be inactive. 

Some argue that larger colonies can afford inactivity because of efficiencies gained through division of labor. This idea is inconsistent with what these authors discovered: larger colonies do not show a higher proportion of inactive workers. Instead, small colonies seemed to rely more on a small number of high-performance workers: the proportion of work performed by the single most active worker is significantly higher in smaller not larger colonies. 


keywords
- collective performance
- star performer
- complexity
- cooperation
- ants
- performance in the aggregate


#collective-action
#collective-performance
#complexity
#aggregating-function




















# Caitlin Reilly lack of social graces

32ish minutes
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YfcBMBtV3ic

You are at a dinner party. A friend invited you, and it is mostly people you do not know. You are crowded around and trying to engage, standing on the outside of the circle. You are clearing trying to listen and want to be part of the conversation, but they are not asking you any questions. They are not making an attempt to bring you into the conversation. They are only talking about insider info and acknowledging each other. 

THEY ARE BEING RUDE. You are not being awkward. They are being rude. Those are the people who were pricks in high school. 

Think about when I host cards: I do everything I can to get people feeling welcomed. 

Here is a way to bring someone into a conversation: [person walks over and you are talking to one other person.]. Look at the new person and say, "hey we were just talking about X..." see if they join. 

Rick Glassman says no, it is on you to make the conversation interesting and join in. But Caitlin was just talking about normal social graces of acknowledging another person. 

#philosophy
#quote
























# Pasquier & Gruter, 2016 "Individual learning performance and exploratory"


In ant colonies, different ants perform specialized behaviors (take care of brood, collective food, build nest, defense against predators). Each individual behavior is linked somehow to the performance of the entire collective. Here they examine the link between the individual behavior of foraging for food and its relationship to the performance of the collective (operationalized as colony foraging success). The relationship dependend on the environment: whether individual behaviors were linked to collective success differed depended on whether the environment was rich (lots of food) or scarce (little food). 



keywords
- cooperation
- collective performance
- performance in the aggregate
- ants


#specialization
#aggregating-function
#collective-action
#collective-performance











































# Wollman, Mi, & Pruitt 2017 "Replacing bold individuals has a smaller impact on group performance than replacing shy individuals"

The notions of "star performers" and "multiple group membership" but from an insect perspective.

"
The collective actions of social groups are shaped by the groups’ behavioral composition. Group members vary widely in their behavior (Jandt et al. 2014) and the distribution of behaviors that are represented in a group impacts how well the group performs (Pinter-Wollman 2012; Farine et al. 2015). For example, the proportion of aggressive (Pruitt and Riechert 2011a, 2011b), exploratory (Aplin et al. 2014; Hui and Pinter-Wollman 2014), sociable (Cote et al. 2012), or bold individuals (Dyer et al. 2009; Cote et al. 2011) in a group can impact how well it collectively finds and defends food and shelter. In some cases, just one or few individuals can have a disproportionately large impact on collective outcomes, either by performing more of the work than other group members or by changing the behavior of others (Robson and Traniello 1999). Such individuals are referred to as ‘keystone individuals’ (Modlmeier, Keiser, et al. 2014) and examples include leaders (Sumana and Sona 2013; Smith et al. 2016), tutors (Hare et al. 2001; Franz and Nunn 2009), and disease super-spreaders (Lloyd-Smith et al. 2005).

Because keystone individuals have a large impact on a group’s success, losing those individuals, for example, because they die or disperse, can have dire consequences for the entire group (Modlmeier, Keiser, et al. 2014). For example, the removal of a keystone individual in primates (Flack et al. 2006) and whales (Williams and Lusseau 2006) results in an unstable social structure, African elephant groups that lose their matriarch cannot  find scarce water holes during droughts, which leads to higher mortality (Foley et al. 2008) and the loss of a keystone individual in ant colonies reduces nest relocation efficiency (Sumana and Sona 2013). Notably, some or all of the effects of the keystone individual may linger after its disappearance (Pruitt and Pinter-Wollman 2015). One possible mechanism that may underlie such lingering effects is that another group member assumes the role of the keystone individual that disappeared. In social insects, when workers are removed from a colony, their vacant positions are  filled by other workers who were previously engaged in di erent tasks (Gordon 1989; Gordon 1996; O’Donnell 1998; Breed et al. 2002; O’Donnell 2006; Gardner et al. 2007; Beverly et al. 2009; Pinter-Wollman et al. 2012). Flexibility in the roles that individuals play within their groups helps to for- tify social groups against environmental perturbation. Still, to date, only little is known about whether keystone individuals, who are a rare phenotype in groups, are replaceable. Here we examine if a certain individual needs to persist in its colony for its social in u- ence to emerge, or whether any individual with the same behavioral attributes can assume the keystone’s role.
"


They examined how replacing a "bold" spider with another "bold" spider (vs replacing one of teh shy spiders) altered group performance. Group performance was sensitive to one but not the other. 



keywords
- star performance
- cooperation
- collective performance
- ants


#stars
#cooperation
#collective-action
#collective-performance

































# Allsop et al., 2016 "Coordination and collective performance: cooperative goals boost interperonal synchrony and task outcomes."

They use a simple lab task to show that coordinated efforts produce results that exceed what would be produced just by adding individual actions together.
- empirical example of "whole greater than the sum of its parts"
- sterile lab task
- good intro on cooperation and coordination


### the whole is better than the sum of its parts

"We demonstrated that in the context of a simple object movement task, the presence of a co-actor led to facilitated productivity (i.e., more hits) and a decrease in accuracy (i.e., more misses) beyond the extent that would be expected by simply combining solo efforts. Characteristic of classic ‘social facilitation’ effects (e.g., Triplett, 1898; Zajonc, 1965), the product of working collectively exceeded the sum of the individual inputs. Similarly, across all conditions, coordination was greater than would be expected had each individual not been impacted by the presence of the other (i.e., chance). Together these findings point to the notion that performance at the dyadic level emerged from the real- time interactions between the participants and the environment, rather than simply being the linear product of each individual’s a priori attributes and static task constraints. This view lends further support to the notion that group productivity can be conceptualized as an emergent phenomenon (McGrath et al., 1999; Marks et al., 2001; Gorman et al., 2010; Waller et al., 2016)."

### the experiment

Undergraduates.

Move balls from a plastic bin on a table into a tube about 4 feet away. Use only your dominant hand. Keep your other hand behind your back.

First, do so individually.

Then, do so with another participant.
- cooperative condition: "move balls as a pair. You need to cooperate to achieve the goal"
- conflict condition: "move balls as an individual. You need to compete."

While performing, the researchers measured "coordination," or the rythmic back adn forth pattern of picking and placing balls among the two.

Results
- people in the competitive condition made more errors (i.e., missed the tube)
- negative correlation between coordination and errors
- when people do this together, they achieve better results than when you take two individual trials and add them together.

Notice that there are no "task dependencies" here. No links. Performance also doesn't develop over time. 


### intro verbage on cooperation and collective teamwork and performance as emergent

Many of life’s most valued outcomes are only attainable by combining efforts with others. No amount of exertion, or expertise, will ever allow the lone rugby player to defeat an opposition team of 15. Similarly, achievements in a modern operating theater, flight deck, boardroom, or restaurant kitchen are enabled to the extent that individual agents act in concert with colleagues. Teamwork, however, is not all moonlight and roses. Not only can group performance exceed the capacity of individual members, but teams can also underperform by failing to optimally realize their collective potential. While researchers have identified several phenomena that characterize specific aspects of group productivity (e.g., social loafing, social facilitation, Köhler effect), the issue, in essence, is one of coordination. Combining efforts leads to the emergence of dependencies (i.e., links) between team members. The efficiency of these links, that is, the extent to which each member’s actions are functionally coordinated, in large part determines the effectiveness of the group.

Grounded in an extensive literature concerning collective performance (see Kozlowski and Ilgen, 2006 for an overview), contemporary theorists have argued that teamwork can be conceptualized as a complex dynamical system (e.g., McGrath et al., 1999; Marks et al., 2001; Gorman et al., 2010; Waller et al., 2016). Specifically, rather than characterize group productivity as the simple aggregate of each member’s individual level attributes (e.g., a priori skill, motivation, capacity), the dynamical stance proposes that collective performance is an emergent property, arising from the interaction of the system’s components over time (Kelso, 1995; Schmidt and Richardson, 2008). Viewed in this way, patterns of productivity are not determined by top-down linear cause-and-effect relationships, but instead emerge via the intermittent and non-linear interactions between individual team members. The effectiveness of, for instance, a team consisting of a rally driver and navigator is not a linear combination of their respective skill levels — excellent navigation combined with poor driving is unlikely to yield performance equivalent to similarly excellent driving paired with poor navigation. In other words, team performance can be considered to emerge from the quality of the functionally specific interactions between team members, that is, the degree to which task-relevant dependencies are coordinated.

[odd that they have "interdependence" language here but they didn't use a task with dependence]

Richardson et al., 2015: ask a pair of people to work on a task. They have to control a dot on a screen and move it to various destinations located on zig-zag points along the gradient. Tell the dyad that their dots cannot cross, but they both have to traverse the same path. Go. With no further instructions, one person adopts a straight-line path and the other adopts an eclipse path. What this shows is that the complementary roles emerged naturally from the interaction between participants and task constraints, rather than from any top-down, a priori plan or set of instructions. 



A rapidly growing body of work attests to the notion that patterns of movement that can characterize self-organized interpersonal coordination are also implicated in effective joint performance. For instance, Abney et al. (2015) reported that performance on a joint tower-building task was improved when partners’ body movements were loosely coupled. Although assigned to distinct task-specific roles and being freely available to communicate, pairs who displayed moderate levels of motor coordination also constructed better towers. Similarly, Fusaroli et al. (2016) showed that uninstructed behavioral coordination positively predicted competence in a group LEGO⃝R building task, while Won et al. (2014) reported that dyads tasked with idea generation were more creative to the extent that they synchronized their movement. More concrete joint action tasks also reveal a functional role for spontaneous motor coordination. People readily make very fine-grained adjustments to their behavior and spontaneously take on distinct task-relevant roles in order to achieve coordination goals (e.g., coordinating landing times when jumping; Vesper et al., 2013). In seminal demonstrations, when given the exercise of moving planks of differing lengths without verbal communication, pairs of participants adopt different behavioral modes (i.e., one-handed, two-handed, or two-person lifting) depending on both plank length and partner ability (Richardson et al., 2007a; Isenhower et al., 2010). Together, what this work indicates is that beyond the notion that people can (and do) coordinate their actions with others, functional task-specific patterns of coordination emerge from goal-oriented interactions — a key characteristic of a self- organizing social system.


[What they are saying is that emergent coordinated actions, or roles, emerge from people recognizing task constraints.]



keywords
- cooperation
- self organizing
- emergence
- collective performance
- coordination
- synchrony
- joint action


#synergy
#synchrony
#joint-action
#cooperation
#collective-action
#collective-performance






















# Richardson, Harrison et al., 2015 "Self-organizing complementary joint action"


Coordinated actions sometimes come from the interaction of people and task contraints rather than top down a priori plans. 


Richardson et al., 2015: ask a pair of people to work on a task. They have to control a dot on a screen and move it to various destinations located on zig-zag points along the gradient. Tell the dyad that their dots cannot cross, but they both have to traverse the same path. Go. With no further instructions, one person adopts a straight-line path and the other adopts an eclipse path. What this shows is that the complementary roles emerged naturally from the interaction between participants and task constraints, rather than from any top-down, a priori plan or set of instructions. And, they do this without speaking with one another.

See also Allsop et al. (above)

[I didn't download the paper]

keywords
- self-organizing
- emergence
- collective performance
- task dependence
- joint action


#self-organization
#synergy
#joint-action
#collective-action
#collective-performance






























# stepping in and out of flow. cognitive vs feelings

Eric Weinstein

Transcendant feelings. 

Going back and forth between getting lost in a thing and then stepping back and thinking about what we are doing. You can capture this in music. I can play a tune and not really realize how I am doing it. Then I can step back, stop playing, and analytically determine what I did. Going in and out of these states is something you should pursue. 

Eric Weinstein
You are recognizing that the transcendant lives in particular structures -- that particular structures elicit this feeling. We have an opportunity to go back and forth between an anlytic description and getting lost in the thing itslef. If I'm thinking about this thing I can't really feel it. And if I"m feeling it I can't really think about it or compose it. 

Find things that speak to your head, heart, and loins. You have to go back and forth between these lenses. 


#quote
#philosophy
















# "women are wonderful effect"

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/09/misandry.html

Scholars, journalists, politicians, and activists will lavish attention on a small, badly flawed study if it purports to find bias against women, but they’ll ignore—or work to suppress—the wealth of solid research showing the opposite. Three decades ago, psychologists identified the “women-are-wonderful effect,” based on research showing that both sexes tended to rate women more positively than men. This effect has been confirmed repeatedly—women get higher ratings than men for intelligence as well as competence—and it’s obvious in popular culture.

“Toxic masculinity” and “testosterone poisoning” are widely blamed for many problems, but you don’t hear much about “toxic femininity” or “estrogen poisoning.” Who criticizes “femsplaining” or pretends to “believe all men”? If the patriarchy really did rule our society, the stock father character in television sitcoms would not be a “doofus dad” like Homer Simpson, and commercials wouldn’t keep showing wives outsmarting their husbands. (When’s the last time you saw a TV husband get something right?) Smug misandry has been box-office gold for Barbie, which delights in writing off men as hapless romantic partners, leering jerks, violent buffoons, and dimwitted tyrants who ought to let women run the world.

Numerous studies have shown that both sexes care more about harms to women than to men. Men get punished more severely than women for the same crime, and crimes against women are punished more severely than crimes against men. Institutions openly discriminate against men in hiring and promotion policies—and a majority of men as well as women favor affirmative-action programs for women.

The education establishment has obsessed for decades about the shortage of women in some science and tech disciplines, but few worry about males badly trailing by just about every other academic measure from kindergarten through graduate school. By the time boys finish high school (if they do), they’re so far behind that many colleges lower admissions standards for males—a rare instance of pro-male discrimination, though it’s not motivated by a desire to help men. Admissions directors do it because many women are loath to attend a college if the gender ratio is too skewed.

Gender disparities generally matter only if they work against women. In computing its Global Gender Gap, the much-quoted annual report, the World Economic Forum has explicitly ignored male disadvantages: if men fare worse on a particular dimension, a country still gets a perfect score for equality on that measure. Prodded by the federal Title IX law banning sexual discrimination in schools, educators have concentrated on eliminating disparities in athletics but not in other extracurricular programs, which mostly skew female. The fact that there are now three female college students for every two males is of no concern to the White House Gender Policy Council. Its “National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality” doesn’t even mention boys’ struggles in school, instead focusing exclusively on new ways to help female students get further ahead.


#marginal-revolution
#tyler-cowen
#anti-woke
#gender
#gender-bias
#toxic-masculinity
#gender-gap
#sex-differences
#disparities
#concern-for-womens-wellbeing































Harvey, Leblanc, & Cronin, 2019 "Beyond separate emergence: a systems view"

A dynamic systems view of team emergent states. 

Team states are components of a dynamic system. The states produce the team's learning climate (TLC). The systems approach highlights aspects of TLC management that are traditionally overlooked, such as feedback between several states and the inertia that TLC can have as a result. The management of TLC becomes an issue of controlling the system rather than each state an as independent force, especially because changing one part of the system will also affect other parts in sometimes unintended and undesirable ways. 

Because leadership activities may influence multiple team emergent states at once, it is fundamental to take a systems view (Sterman, 2000) of how the various states affect the rates of increase and decrease to TLC. It is when leaders are conscious of their influence on emergent states as a system that they come to realize that their interventions can simultaneously affect the various parts of the system in distinct ways (Shuffler et al., 2018), or that their interventions can have little impact because of the inertia found in the system (Ericksen and Dyer, 2004). A focus on one particular emergent state to the exclusion of others is often why practices intended to help wind up being net negative (Sterman, 2000). Leaders can overlook the side effects that would be visible had they taken a broader view of the entire system. This is particularly important in teams because most teams encounter turbulences, and it is during turbulences that their leaders intervene. It is also during such times that a leader’s focus can narrow (Staw et al., 1981).

Inerta vs Non inertia:
"the conditions of states are what influence a team and can persist over time. For example, the level of trust today will maintain itself over time until some other process changes that level. States allow explicit consideration of inertia in contrast to processes, like communication, that only affect the team when they are engaged and thus do not have inertia."

Four emergent states bring about a team's learning climate: psychological safety, goal orientation, cohesion, and efficacy. TLC is a capacity that rises and falls as a joint function of the psychological safety, goal orientation, cohesion, and efficacy that exists in the team. If the level of in any one component of the system (e.g., cohesion) affects but is also affected by other components (e.g., psych safety), then there is feedback. If the levels of a component can persist over time, then there is inertia. It is these two conditions that make a system dynamic (Cronin & Vancouver, 2018). 


Team emergent states that produce TLC

1) psych safety

shared belief that a team is a safe place to take interpersonal risks

It should be thought of as having inertia. It is a belief that builds over time, and while behaviors can subtract from its level, the prior level should persist over time. One angry outburst with a team member would not destroy all psychological safety, although it would probably reduce the level. 

2) goal orientation

learning orientation: focused on learning
performance orientation: focus on tangible results

goal orientation is a state with intertia (people have beliefs about it)

3) cohesion

shared belief or commitment to the task and to other team members

it takes time to build and is shared in individual's beliefs. 

3) efficacy

confidence in capabilities

rooted in beliefs, likely to have inertia. 



#### Interplay among the states is crucial to examine

This leads to the second point, efforts to influence one state may affect the utility of the others. For example, moderate level of team efficacy is recommended for teams to engage in learning behaviors that enhance performance (e.g., Tasa and Whyte, 2005), unless they monitor their goal closely—then, high level of team efficacy is beneficial (Rapp et al., 2014). Such contingencies mean that beneficial effects of one state might be counteracted by negative effects on another. It would explain why some researchers find a positive relationship between cohesion and team learning (e.g., Schippers et al., 2008), and others find no relationship (e.g., van Ginkel and van Knippenberg, 2008). What is unknown is whether some attempts to increase cohesion might not cancel out the benefits by also increasing a negative effects like groupthink (Janis, 1972). The bottom line is that if team emergent states affect each other, then research needs to address how to manage an equilibrium among them in order to maximize positive behaviors and outcomes such as learning in teams. We lack such an understanding of how the four team emergent states collectively influence team learning.

The systems view implies that to truly understand how leadership can manage TLC, research must conduct studies that will simultaneously monitor the equilibration among the different emergent states. To use another analogy, consider a vegetable garden. To achieve the highest yield, the gardener must balance soil quality, sunlight, watering, and pest control. The relative levels of all these factors in concert determine the garden’s potential to produce a healthy crop. Moreover, addressing one factor might influence another (e.g., using pesticides might impair soil quality). Further, the relationships are not linear: Some watering is needed, but not too much, and this also depends on the amount of sunshine. TLC is like the yield of the garden. It represents the team’s potential to learn effectively, based on the current levels of the important factors that support or inhibit team learning. In many ways, leaders must be capable gardeners.



#### right page 6 and left page 7 beautfil description of chains of events in systems dynamics







keywords
- systems dynamics
- team states

#dynamics


















# Modlmeier, Keiser, Shearer, & Pruitt, 2014 "Species-specific influence of goup compositionn on collective behaviors in ants"

The kinds of individuals in a group -- specifically, their behaviors -- influence the collective outcomes that the group experiences. 

These researchers created two kinds of ant groups: one made of aggressive individuals and one made of docile individuals. 

In one type of ant species, having more aggressive individuals among the group improved colony defense and nest relocation efficiency.

In a second type of ant species, having more aggressive individuals among the group didn't do anything.

"This suggests that the mechanisms regulating collective behaviors via individual differences in behavior might differ among even closely related species."



PERFORMANCE IN THE AGGREGATE
- "Pinter-Wollman (2012) suggested that between-group differences in collective behavior can arise via three mechanisms: H1 groups differ in the average behavior of their members; H2 groups contain different behavioral distributions; H3 groups occupy different local environments."


CHRISTOPHER IDEA
- these are "static" differences. Local environment A vs B. 
- between group differences in collective behavior could also arise because groups traverse the same environment at different times, or in different directions. Or because behaviors accumulate over time. Same average. Same distribution. But over time they differ dramatically. What is an example where the average is the same and the distribution is the same, but over time they differ a lot?




keywords
- collective performance
- aggregating
- performance in the aggregate
- team composition
























# Bernstein & Turban, 2018, "The impact of the 'open' workspace on human collaboration"

What happens when you implement an "open" workspace? These authors tracked people using badges. "Contrary to common belief, the volume of face-to-face interaction decreased approximately 70%, and the interactions of electronic platforms increased. In short, rather than prompting increasingly vibrant face-to-face collaboration, open architecture appeared to trigger a natural human response to socially withdraw from officemaates and interact instead over email."

keywords
- dynamics backfiring
- open workspaces
- motivation
- job design


#motivation
#job-design















# The origin of money

Dylan Evans


Carl Menger's account of the origin of money is my favorite scientific explanation. It's deeply satisfying because it shows how money can develop from barter without anyone consciously inventing it. As such, it's a great exmaple of Adam Smith's Invisible Hand, or what scientists now call "emergence." 

The typical mainstream-economics textbook lists the problems of barter exchange and then explains how money overcomes these problems. However, that doesn't really explain how money actually got started, any more than listing the advantages of air travel explains how airplanes were invented. As Lawrence White puts it in The Theory of Monetary Institutions (1999), "One is left with the impression that barters, one morning, suddenly became alert to the benefits of monetary exchange and, by that afternoon, were busy using some good as money." 

That, of course, is ridiculous. In Menger's account, money emerges through a series of small steps, each of which is based on self-interested choices by individual traders with limited knowledge. First, individual barters realize that when direct exchange is difficult, they can get what they want by indirect exchange. Rather than finding someone who both has what I want and wants what I have, I need only find someone who wants what I have. I can then trade what I have for his good, even though I don't want to consume it myself, and then trade that for something I do want to consume. In that case, I will have used the intermediate good as a medium of exchange. 

Menger notes that not all goods are equally marketable; some goods are easier to trade then others. It therefore pays a trader to accumulate an inventory of highly marketable items for use as media of exchange. Other alert traders in the market catch on, and eventually the market converges on a single common medium of exchange. This is money. 

Menger's theory shows not only how money can evolve without any conscious plan, but also that it doesn't depend on legal decrees or central banks. 


#edge
#explanation
#emergence
#economics




# Natural selection is simple, but the systems it shapes are complex

Randolph Nesse

The principle of natural selection is exceedingly simple. The products of natural selection are vastly complex. 

People tend to use the metaphor of a machine: portray the systems that mediate cell devision, immune responses, glucose regulation, and all the rest, using boxes for the parts and arrows to indicate what causes what. Such diagrams summarize important information in ways we can grasp. Teachers teach them. Students dutifully memorize them. But they fundamentally misrepresent the nature of organic complexity. A living organism has little resemblance to an ordinary machine. Machines have discrete parts with specific functions, and most remain intact when turned off. Organisms evolve. They have components with indistinct boundaries and multiple functions that interact with myriad other parts and the environment to create self-sustaining reproducing systems whose survival requires the constant activity and cooperation of thousands of interdependent subsystems. 

Experts know better than to think of the body as a discrete machine. They recognize that the mechanisms regulating blood clotting are represented only crudely by the neat diagrams medical students memorize; most molecules in the clotting system interact with many others. Experts on the amygdala know that it has many functions, not just one or two, and they are mediated by scores of pathways to other brain loci. Serotonin exists not mainly to regulate mood and anxiety; it is essential to vascular tone, intestinal motility, and bone deposition. Leptin is not mainly a fat hormone; it has many functions, performing different ones at different times, even in the same cell. The reality of organic systems is vastly untidy. 

80% of the variation in human height is accounted for by genetic variation. It would seem straightforward to find the responsible genes. But looking for them has revealed that the 180 loci with the largest effects together account for only about 10% of the phenotypic variation. 


#edge
#explanation





# Placing Psychotherapy on a scientific basis: Five easy lessons

Eric R. Kandel

How did psychoanalysis, once a major mode for treating non-psychotic mental disorders, fall so badly in the estimation of both the medical community in the United States and the public at large? 

During 1960-1965, psychotherapy was the major mode of treating mental illness, and this strategy was derived from psychoanalysis and based on the belief that one needed to understand mental symptoms in terms of their historical roots in childhood. These therapies tended to take years, and neither the outcome nor the mechanisms were studied systematically. Psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, when successful, allowed people to work a bit better and to love a bit, and these were dimensions that were considered difficult to measure.

In the 1960s, Aaron Beck changed all that by introducing several major obvious but nevertheless elegant and beautiful innovations:

First, he introduced instruments for measuring mental illness. Until Beck's work, psychiatric research was hampered by a dearth of techniques for operationalizing the various disorders and measuring their severity. Beck developed a number of instruments, beginning with a depression inventory, a hopelessness scale, and a suicideintent scale. These scales helped objectify research in psychopathology and establish better clinical-outcome trials. 

Second, Beck introduced a new short-term, evidence-based therapy he called cognitive behavioral therapy.

Third, Beck manualized the treatments; he wrote a cookbook, so method could be reliably taught to others. You and I could in principle learn to do cognitive behavioral therapy. 

Fourth, he carried out, with the help of several colleagues, progressively better-controlled studies showing that cognitive behavioral therapy worked more effectively than placebos, and as effectively as antidepressants, in mild and moderate depression. In severe depression, it did not act as effectively as an antidepressant but acted synergistically with antidepressants to enhance recovery.

Beck trained as a psychoanalyst in Philadelphia but soon became impressed with the radical idea that the central issue in many psychiatric disorders is not unconscious conflict but distorted patterns of thinking. He conceived this novel idea by listening with a critical -- and open -- mind to his patients with depression. In his early work on depression, Beck set out to test a specific psychoanalytic idea: that depression was due to "introjected anger." Patients with depression, it was argued, experienced deep hostility and anger toward someone they loved. They could not deal with having hostile feelings toward someone they valued, so they would repress their anger and direct it inward, toward themselves. Beck tested this idea by comparing the dreams of depressed patients with those of non-depressed patients and found that in their dreams depressed patients showed, if anything, less hostility than non-depressed patients. Instead, in their dreams, as in their waking lives, depressed patients have a systematic negative bias in their cognitive style, in the way they think about themselves and their future. They see themselves as "losers." 

Beck considered these distorted patterns of thinking not simply a symptom -- a reflection of a conflict lying deep within the psyche -- but a key etiological agent in maintaining the disorders. This led him to develop a sysetmatic psychological treatment for depression that focused on distorted thinking. He found that increasing the patients' objectivity regarding their misinterpretation of situations, or their cognitive distortions and negative expectations, resulted in substantial shifts in their thinking and subsequent improvements in their affect and behavior. 


christopher note:
Many undergrads could use cognitive behavioral therapy. 

#edge
#depression
#cognitive-distortions
#true-psychology
#explanation
#career








# Kitty Geneovese and group apathy

Adam Alter

Social psychologists are taught to overcome the natural tendency to blame people for apparently bad behavior and to look instead for explanations in the environment. Latane and Darley's elegant insight was that human responses aren't additive  in the same way that objects are additive. Whereas four lightbulbs illuminate a room more effectively than three lightbulbs, and three loudspeakers fill a room with noise more effectively than two loudspeakers, two people are often less effective than a single person. People secondguess situations, they stop to make sense of a chain of events before acting, and sometimes pride and fear of looking foolish prevent them from acting at all. 

In one series of studies, Latane and Darley videotaped students as they sat in a room that slowly filled with smoke. The experimenters pumped smoke into the room with a smoke machine hidden behind a wall vent, the effect suggesting that there might be a fire nearby. When a subject was alone in the room, he usually left quickly and told the experimenter that something was amiss. But when a subject was surrounded by two or three others (some of them confederates, who were instructed to sit there immobile) he often remained seated, even as he lost sight of the others through the wall of smoke. 


#edge
#explanation






# Evolutionarily Stable Strategies

S. Abbas Raza

My example of a deep, elegant, beautiful explanation in science is John Maynard Smith's concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS). 

Think of common animal species like cats or dogs or humans or golden eagles. Why do all of them have nearly equal numbers of males and females? Why is there not sometimes 30% males and 70% females? Or vice versa?

Let's consider walruses: They exist in the normal fifty-fifty sex ratio, but most walrus males will die virgins, whereas almost all females will mate. Only a few dominant walrus males monopolize most of the females. So what's the point of having all those extra males around? They take up food and resources, but in the only thing that matters to evolution they are useless, because they do not reproduce. From a species point of view, it would be better and more efficient if only a small proportion of walruses were males and the rest were females; such a species of walrus would make much more efficient use of resources. 

Why hasn't this happend? Here is why: because a population of walruses with, say, 10% males and 90% females would not be stable over a large number of generations. In the 10% males example, each male is producing about nine times as many children as any female -- by successfully mating with, on average, nine females. If you were a male in this kind of population, it would be to your evolutionary advantage to produce more sons than daughters, because each son could be expected to produce roughly nine times as many offspring as any of your daughters. 

Suppose a mutation arose in one of the male walruses that gave this particular male more Y (male-producing) sperm than X (female-producing) sperm. This gene would spread like wildfire through the described population. Within a few generations, more and more male walruses would have the gene that makes them have more male than female offspring, and soon you would get the fifty-fifty ratio we see in the real world. The same argument applies to females. 


#edge
#explanation


















# matt mssusker three stage system of psychological empowerment



Present moment
Able to accept painful material
You can let that annoyance dictate your next behavior, or you can think to yourself, "this is just a thought my body produced." 
Being able to sit with stuff that is painful without having it dictate your behavior. 
Typically when people mitigate psychological pain they try to do a quick manuever just to get rid of it...but these actions make your life smaller and smaller. 
You have a set of values or things that you want in life. 
In combination, you should be able to diffuse yourself from the thought and then move toward the thing that you want rather than constantly trying to mitigate psychological annoyances.

Witness the present
Accept painful or annoying thoughts as natural byproducts of your brain without getting attached to them.
Have a set of values or things you want to achieve. 
Diffuse yourself from the annoyances to get out of the continuous back and forth of running from psychological pain to start taking actions towards things you value.  


#quote
#philosophy














































# Behfar, Cronin, & Mccarthy, 2020 "Realizing the upside of venting: the role"

Is venting at work useful? Tons of prior research says that people don't feel better after venting. 

Behfar et al. find...

venting has "bounded utility." Venting is effective for resolving problems, but it doesnot provide short-term relief for the negative emotions provoked by frustrating situations. The utility of venting also depends on the listener. If the listener's responses provides clues to rethink an initial reaction, then the ventor can change the event to a a problem solving learning experience.

One type of listener is best:
- the challenger listener
- challenge the way someone initially reacts to an event
- so, you don't have to offer validation, or provide answers
- you have to get the person to reorient their thinking about the event




keywords
- helping
- ocb
- cooperation
- listening
- requests for help
- venting
- help seeking



#ocb
#help-seeking
#venting
























# Kubin et al., 2020 “Personal experiences bridge moral and political divides better than facts”

Using facts to handle political disagreements only makes people mad. To get someone to tolerate an alternative position, you have to use personal stories.

keywords
- political polarization
- cooperation
- stories
- moral disagreements


#cooperation
#political-psych
#facts-vs-feelings
#conflict-resolution




















# more golf guy humor


clothes look comfortable, super tailored. 
You make up for your discomfort with your personality by wearing as comfortable clothes as possible

you look like your middle name is run of the mill

you look like the amount on your taco bell receipts is more than your rent

You've got the face only a mother could love

WHEN I LOOK AT YOU, I GET THE SAME FEELING AS WHEN I SIT DOWN ON A COLD TOILET SEAT. 

...Why he was wearing a girlscout outfit, I had no idea.


#humor
#social-animal












# women complaining


Imagine having a 6 years longer life expectancy due to less work related stress, making up only 7% of workplace fatalities, 4% deaths due to war, 24% of suicides and homicides, 20% of the homeless, having people assume you are the victim when you initiated DV in the majority of cases, having laws that cannot identify you as a perpetrator of rape, having a 40% higher adoption rate... and thinking men are privileged

#anti-woke
#disparities












# tim dillon

Stop looking for mystical experiences and go to work.

#dillon
#quote
#philosophy













# When to use I vs Me. 

A good way to understand this is to break the sentence into 2 sentences. For example:
My friend and I went to the movies.
You could say:
My friend went to the movies. I went to the movies.
Now try:
My friend and me went to the movies.
My friend went to the movies. Me went to the movies. (here you can clearly see that me is incorrect, you would not say me went to the movies, so you know to use my friend and I.)
Another example:
The dog took a walk with my friend and me.
The dog took a walk with my friend.
The dog took a walk with me. (here you can see that me is the correct word to use).
Now try:
The dog took a walk with my friend and I.
The dog took a walk with my friend.
The dog took a walk with I. (You can clearly see that I is not correct here).
I hope this helps, I used this many times to help people understand.

#grammer
#grammar
#english
#i-vs-me












# in defense of surveys


in defense of surveys (stated preferences are never revealed preferences. butter vs margerine, grey study)
- you could make the same argument for "lab behavior is never real worl behavior." Take economics games with undergraduate students. They don't map onto what you find with experienced workers
- random bias is fine
- error in a given direction hurts the mean score but it does not hurt parameter estimation of a linear model
- psychometrics: artifact partitioning, use multiple people, different rating sources, different surveys, relationships to other things

So, a psychometrician would say, "in the butter example, the problem is not that you are asking people for their preferences, it is that you are using a poor device to measure preferences."


#christopher-thinking











# quote phil


youtube.com/shorts/CBewjxSNaOw
stop allowing radicals to exploit you on guilt
radical leftists are not moral because THEY PRESUME TO KNOW WHAT THE CAUSE OF TRAGEDY IS and THAT THEY PRESUME TO KNOW WHAT THE SOLUTION IS. 
- it doesn't mean you know the solution, and it doesn't mean you are moral, and it doesn't mean that I'm the devil if I oppose you

#quote
#philosophy
#anti-woke

















# flirt quote philosophy


I want to be able to talk to you without words in dark corners


#flirt
#quote
#philosophy
#bumble
#social-animal
















# humor quote philosophy

Some people have it all. Looks, talent. How does it feel to only have looks?

#humor
#social-animal
















# humor social animal



What makes you...?
The trouble is X isn't often paired with...I wonder if you are...

You're cute but I'm not sure we'd get along

#humor
#social-animal












# humor

What advice would you give to a young actor who wants to hide his jewishness as well as you have?

#humor
#social-animal












# flirt practice 


I like your outfit. Green dress and a jean jacket, which is usually paired with a guitar, fiddle, maybe a banjo. But idk something tells me you have no musical talent whatsoever. 

#social-animal
#flirt-pratice
#opener-practice

































# Tosh et al., 2020 “The piranha problem”

How many explanatory variables can have large effects on an outcome? 

If there is some outcome Y on which a large number of studies demonstrate an effect of a novel IV, then either some of the effects are smaller than claimed, or some of the explanatory variables are essnetially measuring the same phenomenon. 

keywords
- how many effects?
- research methods
- effect size


#stats
#how-many-effects













# Thielmann et al., 2021 “Economic games: An introduction and guide for research

Overview of economic games. 

keywords
- game theory
- cooperation
- economic games



#game-theory
#economic-games
















# NSF examples

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1841374&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2052190&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1561070&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=0713619&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=0240852&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1233197&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2020863&HistoricalAwards=false

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2028409&HistoricalAwards=false




keywords
- grant writing
- national science foundation
- io grants


#nsf



















# pulse examples

https://www.reddit.com/r/COVIDPulses/

keywords
- time series
- pulse


#pulse-examples
















# christopher theory of work meaningfulness and artifacts and success themes



A theory of work meaningfulness 
extended from the job characteristics models
based on identity and artifacts

examples
- comedians not selling shows to comedy central (kurt metzger and james cordan; tim dillon)
- academics and 5-year grant projects vs 3 month publications

job characteristics model
- variety
- autonomy and control
- significance (connected to downstream consequences)
- artifact (identity immersed in each stage of the project)
- feedback


christopher

identity retention
- the artifact or product or idea or paper you produce retains how you wanted it. It still has your identity in it, even after revisions. Higher-ups didn't run with it and ruin it. 

short timeline
- you thought of the idea and sent it out in less than 6 months


we have entered what people are calling the knowledge economy. People develop ideas, and those ideas lead to social platforms, comedy specials, books, products, financial portfolio strategies, and start-ups with innovative organizational cultures. 

at the same time, we have entered a world of beurocracy and "big" everything -- big pharma, big media, big sports, big academia, and big military. NSF funds 


My theory is that you have to work against this culture to find meaningful work. As an academic, the culture is going to ask you to write a 50 page grant with 27 co-authors and at least 17 clear objectives with a multitude of metrics and operating procedures -- and the entire project will span five to ten years and be subject to revision by authority figures from outside your discipline. My theory is that you will find more joy in writing a 5-page paper with no more than one co-author and spending no more than six months between coming up with the idea, collecting and analyzing data, writing it, and getting it published (yes, that means it will not get published in the most prestigious journal -- nobody, except for a tiny niche group of academics, reads those journals anyway). As a comedian, the culture is going to ask you to submit a show idea to comedy central. Three management executives will review it, hand off their critiques to four show-runners who will then meet with you and discuss all of the changes they expect to see before agreeing to fund your project, changes that will ultimately make the project the vision of the executives, not of your world. My theory is that you will find more satisfaction in developing your own special and putting it on Youtube for free. 

You feel satisfaction by witnessing your ideas go from abstract thought to finished and working artifact. 



theory of identifying the theme
algorithm
many more people creating stuff
= easier to identify the theme that yields clicks/wins/sales/success

= 
more people converging onto that theme
faster

= 
more quickly the audience builds distaste for the theme


Because of algorithms, data collections, and the sheer number of people who create stuff,
it has now become easier to identify the theme that leads to success.

100 years ago, a country singer had to produce songs and see if his audience liked them. Today, a country singer can hire a company to use AI to identify themes that predict going viral, embed those themes into his music, and become a star overnight. 

In the past, fewer people could identify the "theme needed for success" in a given domain. Today, many people within a domain can identify the theme quickly. 

Therefore, a field will see quicker convergence to "all of this stuff sounds the same." There will be less variability in the products created in a given discipline, because everyone can quickly tell which themes yield success and which themes do not. 

We are living in a world where, whenever a new bubble of business emerges, the products in that domain quickly become redundant, they become bland, they become stale, they become self-alike. 



#christopher-theory
#christopher-thinking
#work-meaningfulness
#work-satisfaction
#artifacts
#satisfacttion-via-artifacts
































# Cal Newport "So good they can't ignore you" summary

"Follow your passion" is bad career advice. (1) We are all passionate about sports, art, and culture, the domains in which there are few jobs. (2) Such a mindset will make you obsess over useless thoughts, such as "is this right?" "there is something better out there?" "is this my true calling?" -- your true passion is so abstract that it won't lead you to anything tangible. 

Instead, get really good at something rare and valuable. It is going to be hard, and it is going to take a long time. Once you become great, use that talent to leverage opportunities for greater autonomy at your work. Once you are so useful that your work is needed, and you have autonomy, you'll be satisfied at your work. This is true regardless of what sector it's in.


keywords
- motivation
- selection
- careers
- cal newport


#motivation
#cal-newport
#careers
























# Wolfie Christl

We shouldn't just be measuring anything and everything without justification.

"A so-called people analytics firm made hundreds of employees of a company wear invasive badges, recorded their movements, and used sophisticated analytics...

to find out that the cafeteria has tables with 4 seats and tables with 12 seats."


https://twitter.com/WolfieChristl/status/1362494489827377155



keywords
- wasted people analytics
- human resources
- ethics

#ethics
#unintended-consequences-of-people-analytics
#wasted-resources
#people-analytics

















# the problem with iceburg analogy

The problem with the ice-burg analogy / figure:

It says nothing about observational equivalence/distinguishability. The real reason to "go deeper" is because truly distinct things can nonetheless appear identical on their surface. Why isn't Christopher saying anything in this meeting? Possible causes: overstimulation and insufficient resources to provide input; or, shy and terribly worried about social disapproval. You cannot distinguish between those reasons just by observing "he isn't saying anything." My negotiating partner wants X. Possible causes: he is greedy and cares not for others; or, he is an agent speaking on behalf of a company and X is required by the contract. You cannot distinguish between those reasons just by observing "he said he wants X." 

The iceburg image tells people "there is more underneath." But it assumes iceburg A looks different from iceburg B. The real problem is that many iceburgs look the same, even when their deeper structures are vastly different. 

#christopher-thinking
#iceburg
















# Zhang 2021 "Horse-sized ducks or duck sized horses? ..."

Odd personality questions for recruitment are interesting but useless.

"To stand out, some organizations have started asking unorthodox interview questions to uncover unique qualities of the candidates while signaling the playful culture of their organization (e.g., “Would you rather fight a horse-sized duck or 100 duck-sized horses?”). Despite its growing popularity, there is no empirical research on the organizational impact of these unusual questions."

HOW DO APPLICANTS RESPOND? THEY FIND THEM GOOFY. THAT'S THE FINDING. THEY DON'T LOOK AT WHEHTHER THESE PREDICT WORK BEHAVIORS.

keywords
- personality
- people analytics
- prediction
- criterion

#personality
#weird-interview-questions
#criterion-problem
#people-analytics
















# Rodgers 2010 "The epistemology of mathematical and statistical modeling."

Graduate students are only exposed to NHST rule-based statistical quantification, not to the wonders of generating mathematical models. This paper describes the history and notes why it's bad for us to argue about NHST while ignoring real mathematical modeling that occurs everywhere else in science.

NHST is the primary system used to organize quantitative methods in psychology research and training. Instead, we should be discussing how to create and compare behavioral models that are represented mathematically.

Rather than testing null hypotheses that our data arise from a chance process, we should be developoing mathematical models and evaluating them statistically (through goodness of fit tests). 

What is a model?
- a model matches the reality that it describes in important ways
- a model is simpler than reality
- pearl: "an idealized representation of reality that highlights some aspects and ignores others."
-  a mathematical model is one that captures these features within one or more mathematical equations

You can simplify in different directions

"For example, the X-15 model airplane that youth of my generation built was a model in exactly this sense. It matched the real X-15 airplane in many physical aspects yet was obviously simpler. The mechanical engineer’s circuitry blueprint of the X-15 was also a model of the same plane, designed to fit a different part of the reality. Similarly, those who build models of adolescent sexual behavior can simplify in different directions. To some researchers, an outcome variable measuring sexual motivation is a function of genes, proteins, and hormones. To others, it is a function of religiosity and parental influence."

Not all simplified models of the same phenomenon compete with each other.

"To begin, consider the arithmetic mean in relation to the two features in the definition of a model. The mean obviously simplifies the data, because it
substitutes a single summary measure for N data points. It also fits the data in certain senses, because it is the center of mass of the data, and it also has optimality properties in relation to the data that it summarizes. Suppose that our
goal is to build a model that explains the development of cigarette smoking among adolescents. On the basis of a nonrandom sample of 306 college students collected in
2003, Rodgers and Johnson (2007) reported the mean number of cigarettes smoked during one day by the 109 who called themselves “current smokers” as 3.3. The standard
deviation of this distribution was 6.2. These summary statistics are not competing models, either conceptually or statistically, because they summarize different and complementary features of a distribution. Some models are not designed to compete with one another."

However, at other times models compete with one another. The goal is to make the model simpler and simpler. When making it simpler, it reflects less and less of reality. How do you decide when to stop making it simpler? By using statistical model comparisons. 

Conceptually, we ask whether the more complex model includes a necessary and important feature of reality. Statistically, we ask whether the additional match to reality of the more complex model is worth the cost of losing simplicity (by using fit statistics). 


Example of the different paradigms in a smoking example:

(a) model comparisons and mathematical modeling approach

model 1: smokers in a given year include past smokers and new smokers

p(smoker)t = p(smoker)t-1 + t*p(nonsmoker)t-1

model2: incorporate friend effects

p(smoker) = p(smoker)t-1 + b1*p(nonsmoker with smoking best friend)t-1 + b2*p(nonsmoker with nonsmoking best friend)t-1

p() means the proportion of people, not probabilitly.

(b) NHST approach

We could use a two-group t test to statistically evaluate whether adolescents whose best friends are smokers try their first cigarettes at a younger age than those whose best friends are nonsmokers. 

The model comparison and mathematical modeling approach has several advantages
- it establishes dynamic models
- they referenced more features of reality
- the parameters are structurally meaningful


Three different things you have to wrap your head around as a grad student
- NHST
- model comparisons using SEM
- develop your own mathematical model to represent some phenomenon



keywords
- mathematical modeling
- NHST
- dynamics
- computational modeling
- philosophy of science
- why model?



#formal-models
#why-model
#phil-of-science



































# Mroz, Allen, Verhoeven, & Shuffler, 2021 "Do we really need another meeting?"

Key results from the science of meetings, and recommendations about how to promote functional meetings. 

Some recommendations
- only have meetings when necessary
- only invite those who are needed


keywords
- meetings
- undergraduate reading



#meetings
#undergrad-reading




























# Cubrich et al., 2021 "Examining the criterion-related validity evidence of LinkedIn Profile Elements"

Differences in what people put on their linkedIn profiles does not correlate with job performance.


keywords
- undergraduaet reading
- criterion
- validity
- job performance


#undergrad-reading
#linkedin
#validity
#predictive-validity











# panel r package

https://panelr.jacob-long.com/?fbclid=IwAR1sTyvjSuKV7dEsJhuli7ZqeU0qzoEZufQEJgoyJMhYV-2ROVemEm6xob0

keywords
- dynamics
- dynamic panel modeling
- within bewteeen
- mixed effects modeling

















# Hardy, Gibson, Carr, 2019 "Quitters would not prosper: Examining the relationship between"


Many assume that lengthy, pre-interview assessment stuff is bad for companies because it pushes away the top candidates. 

"standard online assessment often falls short because it “screens out both the worst and best candidates: the worst, because the assessment works; the best, because they don’t bother completing it.” (Sabel, 2017). 

[christopher note]
- LinkedIn post: if companies require CV, cover letter, and online filling out of same info, you are annoying your top candidates

So, people assume that lengthy, pre-assessments are bad because they deter the best people. 
- assumption that more hirable applicants are among those most likely to quit assessments they perceive as being too
long or requiring too much effort

This study presents evidence of the opposite conclusion: the best candidates were more, not less likely, to complete the pre assessment battery than their low-performing counterparts. 

Also, people with greater fit perceptions are less likely to drop out.



keywords
- undergraduate reading
- selection
- test batteries
- PE fit
- psychometrics



#selection
#psychometrics
#test-batteries
#pe-fit
#stars


















# Rahmandad & Sterman (2004), "Heterogeneity and network structure in the dynamics..."

When is it better to use agent based models, and when should differential equation models be used?

They run both types to examine a research quesion about diffusion. "Surprisingly, in many conditions the AB and DE dynamics are quite similar."

RESEARCH IDEA
- this paper is..."does the result differ if I use ABM rather than DE?"
- My paper...
- Which approach, ABM or DE, allows you to...
++ write straight-forward code
++ reproduce the model with ease
++ generalize the model to other problems
++ run the model in a meaningful amount of time
In my opinion, that is the choice for using a particular approach. You decide to use an approach for computational efficiency and readability, not because it'll change the results.


keywords
- agent based modeling
- philosophy of science
- computational modeling


#phil-of-science
#agent-based-modeling
















# Bradler, Dur, Neckermann, & Non, "Employee recognition and performance: a field"

Recognition is an important source of employee motivation. But how should managers allocate recognition: should they praise all? or should they recognize only extraordinary performances?

On the one hand, exclusive recognition might raise the performance of high-performers even further as they feel acknowledged and motivated by the public praise. However, this might come at the cost of discouraging and frustrating the non-recipients. On the other hand, non-recipients might respond positively as they are encouraged to catch up with the high-performers while the latter might rest on their laurels.

Lab study
- students do work
- experimentally manipulate praise:
++ only praise top performer
++ praise top three performers
++ praise everyone


They find that praise to the top three performers results in the best performance gains. This study is inconclusive. The results aren't important. The framing and the question are awesome.

keywords
- performance management
- motivation
- rewards
- undergraduate reading


#performance-management
#motivation
#incentives
#undergrad-reading
















# Graham, Harvey, & Puri, 2010, "A corporate beauty contest"


Subjects rate CEO faces as more "competent" and less "likeable" than non-CEO faces. 

Mature looking CEOs are assigned higher "competence" scores. 

No evidence that the firms of competent looking CEOs perform better. 

The "look" of competence says very little about effective competence.



keywords
- undergraduate reading
- not sure the point of this study
- diversity
- vignette
- dumb ratings
- silly psych affects that have no real-world implications


#diversity
#vignette
#silly-psych-artificats-no-real-world
#undergrad-reading
#beauty-contest

























# Buchheim & Kolaska, 2016 "Weather and psychology of purchasing outdoor movie tickets"

Your predictions about the future overweight current conditions and underweight unknown future conditions.

The consequences of many economic decisions only materialize in the future. Examples of such decision problems include weekly grocery shopping, planning a summer vacation months ahead, as well as making investment decisions that may have profound effects on living standards later in life. The standard model of rational behavior assumes that individuals facing such decision problems maximize their expected utility, implying that individuals are both aware of all the relevant choice alternatives and capable of correctly anticipating their future consequences. The model also implies that the state of the world at the time of decision making is irrelevant for the choices made, as long as today’s state is not linked to future outcomes of interest. In contrast, recent psychological models suggest mechanisms through which current conditions may nevertheless affect intertemporal decisions. People overestimate the degree to which future states will resemble the current one. 

We test whether customers are affected by such biases when they buy advance tickets for an outdoor movie theater, a real-world situation that, due to the availability of reliable weather forecasts, closely resembles a stylized decision problem under risk. We find that customers’ decisions are heavily influenced by the weather at the time of purchase, even though the latter is irrelevant for the experience of visiting the theater in the future. 

So, when considering whether to buy an outdoor movie ticket, you take into account hte current weather when you should take into account the future weather.


keywords
- heuristics
- cognitive psychology
- decision making
- predictions


#prediction-errors
#heuristics
#decision-making






























# Kotiloglu, Chen, Lechler, 2019 "Organizational responses to performance feedback"

Nice review and meta analysis of performance feedback. 


Main results of standards/aspirations/feedback level/goal
- when performance is below a standard (aspiration/goal), orgs increase action intensity
- when performance is above a standard, orgs decrease action intensity

It depends a lot on private/public firm, sector of the market, size of the company, etc.


keywords
- performance management
- performance
- feedback
- goals/aspirations/standards


#performance-management
#feedback
#aspirations
#goals
















# List & Momeni, 2021 "When corporate social responsibility backfires"

When an org implements corporate social responsibility intiatives, employees start to shirk on their primary job duties. 

They argue for a "moral liscensing" explanation: doing good (CSR) induces workers to misbehave on another dimension that is harmful to the firm.



keywords
- motivation
- performance
- corporate social responsibility
- intervention backfires
- dynamics
- systems dynamics


#corporate-social-responsibility
#dynamics
#intervention-backfire
#motivation



























# Bavafa & Jonasson, 2020 "The variance learning curve"

We all know about the learning curve: performance improves with increased experience according to a quadratic shape (quick early gains, slow later gains). 

There is also a variance learning curve: performance becomes more consistent over time.

They analyze paramedic performance. How fast can paramedics pick up patients and bring them to hospitals?

Find evidence of an average, traditional learning curve. For early career paramedics, an increase in experience of 500 emergencies improves performance (shortens the time it takes to deliver patients to hospitals). Susequently, experience exhibits diminishing returns for improving performance.

Find evidence of a variance learning curve. The variance of paramedic performance greatly reduces over the first 500 emergencies, and thereafter demonstrates diminishing returns.


keywords
- learning
- performance
- motivation
- performance management
- learning curve
- organizational learning
- self regulation
- learning curve review



#learning
#learning-curve





















# Benson & Rissing, "Strength from within: internal mobility and the retention of"

Should you promote people internally from your own organization or fill vacancies externally?

Most prior studies find that internal advancees outperform external hires. Why?

1) internal advancers will exhibit higher initial performance than external hires

Human capital theory
- Internal people have already developed firm-specific skills

2) internal advancers will exhibit faster performance increases than external hires

Contextual learning theory
- learning new skills is compounded by complements that internals learned in their earlier roles

3) orgs retain more internal hires relative to external hires among top performers

Theories of commitment
- external hires are already more aware of outside opportunities
- internal hires feel sunk costs in the organization
- internal hires perceive that their employer will recognize future contributions

Both (a) internal hires and (b) high performers are unlikely to quit, but high performing internal hires are especially unlikely to quit. 




Cool discussion of selection history

In the mid-twentieth century, large American corporations typically developed and advanced employees along predictable internal career pathways (Althauser and Kalleberg 1981). Starting in the 1980s, employers began emphasizing flexibility and external competitiveness, increasingly turning to external job candidates and contractors to fill vacancies that would have once presumably gone to internal candidates (Davis-Blake and Uzzi 1993, Tolbert 1996). Various Anglo countries have shared the U.S. experience, though internal labor markets have been more resilient in other countries, particularly in continental Europe and Southeast Asia (Hall and Soskice 2001). For workers, this transition has been associated with less job security, shorter job tenures, and the expectation that workers’ careers would likely span multiple organizations (Hollister 2011).




keywords
- selection
- performance
- possible simulation
- turnover

#great-paper
#selection
#turnover
#internal-hiring
#internal-mobility
























# Benson, Li, & Shue "Promotions and the peter principle"

People are often promoted based on current success rather than managerial potential.


The best worker is not always the best candidate for manager. In these cases, do firms promote the best potential manager or the best worker in their current job? Using microdata on the performance of sales workers at 131 firms, we find evidence consistent with the Peter Principle, which proposes that firms prioritize current job performance in promotion decisions at the expense of other observable characteristics that better predict managerial performance.



keywords
- selection
- performance
- promotion

#peter-principle
#selection
#promotion
#performance-management
#internal-mobility
#great-paper


































# Rivkin & Siggelkow, 2007 "Patterned Interactions in Complex Systems: Implications"


How much should an organization invest in the exploration of new possibilities? On one hand, managers must embrace the exploration of new possibilities. otherwise, the organization fails to innovate. On the other hand, managers must contain exploration because it competes for resources with another crucial organizational process, the exploitation of known opportunities. Effective orgs strike a healthy balance, but doing so is hard.


Previous models recommend that as more choices interact and create greater complexity, a firm should explore to escape local optima.

This paper shows that it depends a lot on the type of interactions (network) among the choices.



keywords
- exploration exploitation
- strategy
- NK model
- simulation


#exploration-exploitation
#strategy




















# Levinthal & Worklewicz, "When two bosses are better than one: nearly decomposable"

Cool writing on nearly decomposible systems.

There are many studies of interdependence, but few studies of hierarchical (nearly decomposible) interdependence. 

One the one hand, division of labor is great. 
"Divide labor to allow members to focus on smaller partitions of their task environment and, in the process, capture gains from specialization, which allows organizational members to better meet the demands of their local task environments. This form results in a structure where the task environment is partitioned into multiple subunits, and those subunits, in turn, are divided into even smaller sub-subunits."

But lots of division is hard to integrate.
"As tasks and knowledge become increasingly diversified, integrating becomes more challenging." "Integrating many interdependent subunits would overwhelm a manager. Fortunately, the integration problem is made easier by the fact that the structure of many orgs is nearly decomposable." "Near decomposability removes us from having to deal with all complexity at once. Having determined the behavior of subunits at one level, we can replace the details of these subunits by a small number of aggregate parameters, and use these to represent the system at the next level above. Or, looking from the top down, we can say that the behavior of the units at any given level does not depend on the detail of structure at the next level below, but only upon the steady state behavior, in which the detail can be replaced by a few aggregated parameters."



Managerial decisions differ in abstraction as you go higher up the chain of command. When moving up the chain of command in a firm, the decisions tend to be more abstract, general, and ambiguous, while the planning horizon becomes longer and the frequency of decisions lower. 



keywords
- near decomposability
- NK model
- interdependence
- managerial decision making
- complexity




#near-decomposability
#complexity
#interdependence
#division-of-labor
#specialization







# Savalei, 2018 "A comparison of several approaches for controlling measurement error in small samples"


Failing to account for measurement error (regression) is bad. But SEM approaches, which do account for measurement error, are highly variable in small samples. 

He recommends using single indicator models as an intermediate. Sum your indicators to create a composite variable. Then, use that single composite to estimate a latent factor. 


keywords
- simulation
- measurement
- psychometrics

#psychometrics
#measurement-error
#simulation




















# Woolley et al. "Evidence for a collective intelligence factor in the performance of human groups" (science)


General Intelligence
- correlation among scores on diverse cognitive tasks is positive
- an individual can perform well on a wide variety of tasks
++ isn't this defining intelligence as its outcome?

Collective intelligence
- general ability of a group to perform a variety of tasks
- inference you draw when the ability of a group to perform well on one task is correlated with group's ability to perform a wide range of other tasks

study
- 40, 3-person groups work on tasks across 5 hours
- complete final criterion task (chess against computer)

results
- factor analysis of team scores yields a single factor
- c factor predicts criterion performance
- average or max intelligence of individual members is not related to criterion performance


study 2 
- same thing but with different criterion measure (architectural design)
- when completed by individuals, then individual intelligence strongly predicts performance
- when completed by groups, then c factor strongly predicts performance


what relates to c? what predicts it?
- average social sensitivity of group members
- equal distribution of turn taking when speaking
- more females in group (social sensitivity)


Closing thoughts
- could a short collective intelligence test predict a management team's long-term success?
++ isn't that like saying, can success predict success?
- could a group's collective intelligence be increased by better electronic collaboration tools?
++ isn't that like saying, can tools increase collective performance?


my thoughts
- g is your ability to think, comprehend, reason, and hold things in memory
++ it is cognitive
++ it has a definition
++ it is indicated 
- is c cognitive?
- they are defining c by its measures. the definition should be separate from its measures

what about collective knowledge? your store of knowledge. requires memory. requires systems that allow you to draw on work done before you. 

this is not collective intelligence, it is collective success. 


#collective-intelligence
















# Kim et al. "What makes a strong team? Using CI to predict team performance"

Prior research shows that CI exists and predicts future team performance. All of this work was done on traditional teams (simple tasks, unchanging members, face-to-face).

Does CI predict future performance among online teams? (league of legends). 

Yes.
- they measure CI among players with lab tasks
- then measured in-game performance


my thoughts
- what about when members change?


#collective-intelligence


















# Aggarwal et al., 2019 "The impact of cognitive style diversity on implicit learning"

Orgs care about the benefits of diversity for outcomes like team learning.

They propose that diversity influences team learning through collective intelligence.

Diversity => CI => teams learn faster


#collective-intelligence
















# O'Bryan, Beier, & Salas, "How approaches to animal swarm intelligence can improve the study of collective intelligence in human teams"

Overview of swarm intelligence, collective intelligence, and how animal studies can help human studies.

swarm intelligence
- instances where group living enhances solving problem capacity
- school of fish navigating toward target
- each individual moves toward an imprecise estimate
- and tries to remain cohesive with other members
- due to the "many wrongs" principle, the group will end up close to the target

collective intelligence in humans (weschler, 1971)
- enhanced performance of groups above individuals that comes about when interactions between group members lead to the emergence of improved insights or abilities.
- emerges when new insights are generated from the combination of member knowledge, skills, and perspectives.

UGGGH. IS IT...
- ENHANCED PERFORMANCE
- INSIGHTS

collective intelligence (woolley)
- groups consistent performance on tasks that is correlated with performance on other tasks
- salas doesn't like it


What most people do is correlate predictors (CI, communication, intelligence, cohesion) to team outputs or performance. Great, but teams are dynamic, complex systems. Team processses evolve over time due to interactions and changing task demands. We don't know about mechanisms or emergent dynamics. What are some insights from swarm studies?



They study simple organisms.
They measure individual behaviors (behavioral data in real time)
They measure group-level properties
They consider how behavioral "rules" underly the emergence of group-wide outcomes
They build simulations to demonstrate how individual behaviors lead to group properties
Validate those simulations by comparing output to real organisms


Bee hive quorum is an example of how individual communciation interactions are combined into a group level outcome

Not a paper on how to think differently. Simply another paper that says we need to use badges and real time data collection techniques. 




Some ideas for studies
- 6.2 (end)
- page 11 bottom: network link to individual behaviors
- page 11 middle on turn taking



#swarm-intelligence
#collective-intelligence










# Tomprou et al. 2021 "Speaking out of turn"

Synchrony and nonverbal cues are important for the development of collective intelligence. But jobs are done online via distributed systems. Can people develop nonverbal, virtual synchrony?


With video, synchrony developed through facial expressions (which helps build ci)
Without video, synchrony developed through tone and turn-taking and rhythm
Video may actually impede turn-taking and tone synchrony. 



#collective-intelligence











# Riedl et al., "Make your crowd smart"

Crowdsourcing can go horribly wrong. (There are some problems that crowds are simply terribly suited to solve). Here is some guidance for when to crowdsource.

(a) Search crowd

When you have a low-complexity, well-defined problem and you think an answer exists but you just need someone to tell you where it is, then use a search crowd. Have each person generate an independent answer. Make the crowdsourcing environemtn widely accissble, clear, and advertise broadly.

Allow for submissions and ratings of ideas.

(b) Wired crowds

When you want a new solution that builds on prior work, use wired crowds. Here is what was done in the past, here is the best prototype that was done in the past, and here is why we think it was best. Using this best example, tackle a larger problem.

(c) Crowd teams

For extremely complex problems where you need experts to work together, use crowd teams. Encourage burstiness (independent work followed by active period where people collaborate in real time).

High performing teams have fewer topic repetitions.


HIGH PERFORMING TEAMS ARE BURSTY AND HAVE FEW TOPIC REPITIONS. 


#burstiness
#crowd-sourcing










# Aggarwal & Woolley, 2021 "Team creativity, cognition, and cognitive style"


Cognitive diversity could be useful for team creativity because different members have unique insights, but it could also create a lack of shared mental models and lead to poor teamwork. 

Cognitive diversity will hurt some forms of team cognition (like team strategic consensus, or the shared understanding of goals and strategies for achieving goals among team members) but facilitate others (like TMS, or a team's understanding of how skills are distributed within the team). 

TSC negatively relates to creativity; TMS positively relates to creativity.

Cog diversity => Team cognition => Creativity

Diversity introduces differences in what information members pay attention to, the process through which they conduct task work, and which strategies that consider important for task completion (so, diversity leads to no strategic consensus).

When groups are diverse, it is easier to determine how cognitive skills and resources are distributed about the team (so, diversity leads to TMS). 


WHAT WAS MY OLD TRANSACTIVE MEMORY SYSTEMS IDEA?
WHAT WAS THAT NSF GRANT WHERE THE PERSON TALKED ABOUT MANAGERS AND COGNITION?

ALSO, OBSERVATIONS ARE CRUCIAL HERE. COGNITIVE DIVERSITY IS EXOGENOUS, BUT IN REAL LIFE IT ISN'T. FIRST, YOU HAVE TO OBSERVE PEOPLE PERFORMING. 
- "Through performing tasks and answering questions, a member establishes credibility and expertise status. Other members, being aware of the person's experise, direct new knowledge in the domain to him or her, which reinforces the person's specialization."
- observability


#cognitive-diversity
#collective-intelligence
















# O'Leary, Woolley, & Martensen "Multiteam membership in relation to multi team systems"

Multi team systems are not the same as multi team membership.

MTSs are team matrices which are interdependent and all act in concert toward at least one superordinate goal. 

You can have input, process, and output interdependence. 

MTM can exist outside the context of MTS. In some situations, you have multi team membership but those different teams dont share goals (think GitHub). 

Managers think being on multiple teams is a way to motivate and retain workers.
"I think it is much easier to manage in a multiproject environemnt. If someone works for you 100% of the time, and there is a lull, then you have to find something good for them to do. But if they are on several different projects, then there is always something for them to do."

Some people might have to switch roles frequently, others less frequently. Some might have to switch between roles that are very different, others that are very similar.

IDEA; COLLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE
COMING BACK TO PROJECTS
COMING BACK TO TASKS
HELP YOURSELF BY ACKNOWLEDGING THAT YOU WILL HAVE TO COME BACK TO THIS

When you only have 1 project, then it provokes anxiety when the project lulls. When you have 2 projects that you can switch between, then you can shift to value-time on task when each project expresses a lull. Of course, as you get more and more projects, it becomes overbearing and you have role conflict, overload, and it takes lots of time to regain focus and reimmerse yourself.
- switching when there is a lull = "load balancing"


#multi-team-systems
#multi-team-membership



















# Gupta & Woolley, 2018 "Productivity in the era of multi-teaming"

Multi-teaming hurts team performance by reducing TMS, but when you use a dashboard you can mitigate that harm. 


For example, an individual working with the same team members across a set of projects experiences low variety, whereas working on the same number of projects but with different members on each constitutes high variety (see Figure 1). Aggregated to the team level, as variety increases, the focal team’s performance will suffer because of logistical and cognitive demands imposed on their attention. Logistically, not only will the focal team’s members have to manage increasingly diverse and complex information [9], but also the coordination costs of the focal team will increase significantly. For example, it will become harder to find a common meeting time. At the cognitive level, low-variety multi-teaming leads to reduced cognitive load associated with tracking different team members, which makes switching between two relatively similar teams easier than switching between two relatively different teams [20, 42]. By contrast, members experiencing high-variety multi-teaming must reconcile the variance in member’s disparate mental models, perspectives and capabilities within the same timespan [29, 37, 55].


#multi-team-membership
#team-performance








# Woolley 2009 "Means vs Ends: Implications of Process and outcome Focus"

Teams and individuals can differ in whether they consider outcomes (ends) or processes (means). Do you discuss objectives and the overall end goal or how those objectives should be accomplished?


Process-focus is great when membership changes are frequent. It helps reduce error, stress, cognitive burden, and reduced process loss.

Outcome-focus is great when dealing with task change. She claims that when you have an abstract, general, outcome focus, you immediately realize that goals can be realized in many different ways. This makes you more flexible.
[that cognitive realization is assumed but not measured]

Teams that are outcome focused are innovative and adapt more effectively to task difficultites, whereas teams that are process-focused commit fewer errors. 


#self-regulation
#teams
#team-performance
#process-vs-outcome-focus









# Woolley Handbook "Collective intelligence in teams and organizations"

Collective intelligence is a group's capability to collaborate and coordinate effectively.

What ingredients do you need for collective intelligence?

They offer advice in five different areas:

(1) strategy - goals and objectives

Provide clear goals
Don't use teams where teams are not needed. Think about whether the task requires a team.



(2) structure - grouping activities & coordination

Differentiation and integration is huge. Division of labor is often useful, but you then need some way of integrating everything back together. 

There is no one best way to design the linkages and hierarchy of your organization.




(3) process - flow of information


Dozens of studies have demonstrated the positive effects of TMS on group performance. "

Ends vs means focus is important, and how much members agree about emphasizing ends vs means.

Group learning either means the group has different knowledge or different processes/repertoires. 



(4) rewards - motivation and incentives

The effects of money are hard to know.

People will free ride when they have the option to.




This review was all over the place.


#collective-intelligence














# Task types

Steiner (1972) and Forsyth (2006) task structures:
- conjective: operate at the level of the lowest performer
- disjunctive: operate at the level of the highest performer
- additive: all contributions add to performance
- compensatory: performance of one can offset the others (wise crowds)

Unitary (cannot be divided into subtasks) vs divisible (can be)

McGrath (1984) circumplex
- generate: creativity and planning tasks that require idea generation
- choose: select among specified alternatives
- negotiate: resolving conflicts
- execute: dexterity


#tasks
#steiner
#interdependence
#task-taxonomy










# gavin mcinnes and alex stein dis-invited to penn state

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=421ExztC4To

#anti-woke
#woke-at-penn-state








# why academia is great

academia benefit

own schedule
few meetings
autonomy





 bad about real workplaces: endless slack and meetings

[don't ever forget DARPA zoom days]
[applied would be all that]



I've left the field today. So happy about it. No more writing theory endlessly. No more tears or unhappiness. So f******* happy!

+
+

"Now you get to write phony office messages in a slack channel endlessly! 

But on a more serious note, congrats on finding your own happiness."





Does anyone else horribly regret choosing to do this with your life? x8

+
+

"No, six figure job that gives you months off and requires minimal effort once you get past the tenure hurdle. Most jobs require you to work more as you progress/advance; this job allows you to work less and less X7
^ There are a handful of other prefessions which also require early career sacrifices in exchange for high rewards later in life. Medicine has residency, lawyers take years to make partner, dentists, etc. PhD programs for us are the equivalent to med/law school, and pre-tenure is like a residency. "


I don't regret this career at all. It is intellectually stimulating, it pays well, and has a lot of flexibility. I would prefer not having to change cities / states if I want to change my job, but other than that, I'm quite happy.



I get paid 200k with summer support to teach a few classes every fall and fiddle with data. I have access to cafes, a good bookstore, and great hiking. Life's extremely good. 





#why-academia
#stay-in-academia
#academic-career
#benefits-of-academia
#christopher-note











# red tape nonsense: committee is formed and it ultimately decides to make another committee



harvard committee writes a 26 report stating that their ultimate solution is to create yet another committee. Regardless of your stance on the committees goal, the procedural absurdity is clear. A presidential task force led to another task force which, after significant time, led to a committee with almost the exact same name as the second task force. I challenge anyone other than the task force member themselves to identify the value created for a single Harvard student's educational experience. 

Harvard employees 7024 administrators, only slightly fewer than the undergraduate population.

https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/12/harvard-fact-of-the-day-2.html





#pg-red-tape
#red-tape
#marginal-revolution



















# people analytics viewed as important as finance

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/best-hr-people-analytics-articles-october-2022-david-green-/

#people-analytics-growth
#people-analytics-hype



























# Woolley et al. "Collective intelligence and group performance"

IO psych studies factors that predict group performance in particular contexts on specific tasks.

CI is the general ability of a group to perform well across a wide range of diferent tasks. 


Bottom up predictors of CI (not average or max g of members)
- social perceptiveness of group members (judge emotions by reading eyes)
++ this variable is relevant even in non-visual settings
- cognitive diversity (when the task is about creativity)


Top down predictors of CI (not sure I agree with this label)
- greater communication
- equality of communication turn taking
- CI not predicted by group satisfaction, social cohesion, or psych safety



#collective-intelligence











# Woolley & Malone "Measuring Collective Intelligence in Groups: Reply"

CI is a general, latent factor. CFA tests are solid, but inter item correlations are low and factor loadings are low (too low, according to authors C & H).

Woolley cites evidence that low factor loadings are fine -- you don't want redundant items.

Low inter-item correlations are also fine.

CI is in its initial stages, and it is a broad construct, represented through many different kinds of tasks. It isn't like self efficacy which has super specific items.


#collective-intelligence








# original crede and howardson critique

(1) low task to task correlations

You define CI as the general ability to perform well across different tasks. If that is true, then task performance (A) should highly relate to task performance (B). It doesn't. Task performance correlations are 0.20-0.5 (I actually think that's high).

[christopher writing]
Both could be correct. I could run a DGP where there is a general c factor but it has low factor loadings. If so, then task correlations would be low (and there would be many other things to look for in the performance of tasks). 


(2) low motivation

Task performance to task performance correlations would be inflated if students are simply not motivated.

If you look at the descriptive statistics of the tasks used by Woolley, some groups have scores of zero (on a brainstorming task that they had 10 minutes to complete).

Same thing on the intelligence test -- nobody is trying (just look at the descriptives). 

[Woolley cuts this out by saying that motivation isn't related to CI].


(3) nested data

Consider a set of groups with each group being comprised of randomly assigned individuals. Each group performs a series of group tasks. However, rather than engaging any kind of group discussion or decision-making process, each group decides to simply take the average of the solution arrived at by each individual group member and use that average to
represent the group solution for any given group task. Thus, there are no differences in either group processes (because all groups use the same averaging process) or group composition (due to the random assignment of individuals to groups). Under such conditions no evidence for a collective intelligence factor should be found. The absence of collective intelligence notwithstanding, a factor analysis of the resultant group-level performance scores will likely indicate the presence of a general factor, thus leading to the erroneous inference that a collective intelligence factor is present. Such inference would nevertheless be a purely statistical artifact stemming from the nested data and random group assignment


#collective-intelligence

































# Mayo & Woolley, 2021 "Variance in group ability to transform resources into performance"

What are the effects of group resources on group performance?
Does the effect differ by group? Is the relationship between resources and performance different across groups? Meaning...some groups are better able to use resources than others.

Main effects:
- functional diversity (resource1) relates to performance
- group size (resource2) relates to performance

Random coefficient effects:
- significant variability on the slope of functional diversity
++ the effect of FD on performance differs by group
- significant variability on the slope of group size
++ the effect on performance differs by group

IGNORE TIME. This isn't a growth model. It is a snapshot model.

They calculate a "what does more variability" get you statistic on page 21.



Email burstiness is a signal of coordination, which predicts group performance. 


#collective-performance
#burstiness














































################################# 00
#################################
#################################
#################################

Ruark
Dionne

Leadership Emergence Papers




















################################# 1
#################################
#################################
#################################


# McHugh et al "Collective decision making"

We know a lot about leadership and decision making, but in today's world collectives have to make decisions, and leaders have to manage those collectives. How do collectives make informed decisions? And how do leaders manage this process?


Individual intelligence =>
Collective intelligence =>
Good collective decisions

So, really they are asking, "what correlates with good collective decisions?"

But, after reading their ABM, they are truly interested in how task characteristics interact with individual and collective characteristics to inform collective decisions. 

GOOD EXAMPLE OF ABM DIFFERENT FROM HYPOTHESES DIFFERENT FROM INTRO.

ABM

(1) problem domain

n domains (x axis), each with a true value between 0 and 1

(2) task complexity

randomly generated number between 20 and 100. This represents the number of domains in the problem domain. More complex tasks have problems with more domains.

(3) assign collective characteristics

All members of team X get the same value of inspiration, mutual reliance, and collaboration method (face to face or virtual). These determine how people in the collective form connections with one another, but it is unclear how.

(4) assign individual agent characteristics

intelligence (rnorm between 0 & 50)

knowledge
- for each domain
- runif between 0 and -0.5
- 0 means perfect knowledge for domain n
- 0.5 or -0.5 means off by that amount
- overall knowledge is average of knowledge for each domain

Each individual then has his or her own problem domain (that is or is not close to the true problem domain).

(5) select speaker

randomly select someone from the collective to speak

(6) share opinion about one domain

Low intelligence = randomly select a domain to share

High intelligence = select a domain to share in which she has higher knowledge

Share opinion on selected domain (the value for that position selected).

(7) neighbors update knowledge

Update knowledge for that domain toward the speaker's value (with noise). 

(8) repeat

Until all members of collective have same value for each domain with problem set.

(9) evaluate quality

How close is the collective problem domain to the true problem domain?







Other aspects to look at
- time to reach consensus
- belief updating
- task determines how individual beliefs are aggregated into collective beliefs. Take average of individual problem functions. Take max. Take min. Etc.
++ so, early on in problem solving, use a averaging function in which the wisdom of the crowd can be useful. Later on, when people have persuaded each other, use a consensus emergence aggregating function.
- the problem domain could be behavioral performance rather than cognition. Each domain is a task. Those task performces become aggregated. 



#dionne
#leadership-quarterly-simulations

#################################
#################################
#################################
#################################













################################# 2
#################################
#################################
#################################

# Cao et al. "An ABM of leader emergence"

We know many different correlates of leadership emergence. Let's combine them into a comp model to evaluate the mechanistic means through which leaders emerge. 




(1) problem domain

team problem domain
each agent has a problem domain

(2) agent characteristics

talkativeness 
- willingness to propose

intelligence
- number of domains that the agent has an opinion on
- how close each opinion is to the true domain 

credibility
- if high, listeners are more likely to give the speaker a high evaluation

perceived leadership
- begins at zero for every agent

(3) select speaker

Selection probability of an agent is proportional to talkativeness.

(4) speaker select domain to resolve

Look at team problem domain. Which one is way off (according to my own individual problem domain)?

Problem domain line method
- intelligent people have access to more domains

Problem 2 aspect dimensions method
- [.3, .6]
- [.2, .9]
- intelligent people can hold more of these in memory and compare to true problem domain
- this assumes that less intelligent people have access to all aspects of the problem, but they have fewer plans in memory.


(5) Speaker suggest a new value for a given domain.


(6) Listeners evaluate

Is this new value within a tolerance amount of what I believe to be the value for this specific domain?

If yes
- speaker leadership increases according to a constant plus credibility

If no
- speaker leadership decreases according to a constant plus credibility

Two issues here

a: intelligence and true domain

If listeners evaluate a proposal based on their own beliefs, then there is no gaurantee that they will converge on the correct domain. They will converge on what is common among the group.

If listeners evaluate a proposal based on seeing that it is closer to true, then the team will converge on the correct domain.

So, maybe individuals calculate "how wrong they are" by using their domains.

And when a speaker presents, he reveals "how wrong would we be if I gave this new value?"


Oh wait, it is a democratic model. Based on my belief, I don't support it. But someone else, based on his belief, supports it. If supports > not, then the group plan is updated.

So, if you have enough intelligent people in the group, or if you have people who are open to trying new things, then you can converge on the right answer.



b: leadership perceptions

Does one agent have leadership perceptions from all other people that then become aggregated?

Or just one overall perception of leadership?


People could disagree in their perceptions of the leader. 



(7) update team plan

If more people support than reject, then change the domain of the team domain.



(8) output

Leadership perceptions for each agent

Number of proposals that the agent gave that were accepted/rejected

Utility of the group plan


What you want to be able to show is that talkative people win initially, but people start to realize that their proposals suck, so smarter people start to take over. Smarter people are the "delayed" emergent leaders. Talkative people are the "quick" emergent leaders.



#dionne
#leadership-quarterly-simulations

################################# 
#################################
#################################
#################################























################################# 3
#################################
#################################
#################################

# Serban et al., "Leadership emergence"

We know about individual characteristics that predict leadership emergence. What are some multi-level, contextual moderators? (network density).

Silly simulation.

Individual characteristics
Self efficacy
personality
cognitive ability 

Those have different weights in predicting leadership depending on whether the team if virtual or face-to-face

At each time point, use the weights to create a leadership score for each team member. Run it again and again and again. Who emerges as the leader first?


#dionne
#leadership-quarterly-simulations

################################# 
#################################
#################################
#################################




















################################# 4
#################################
#################################
#################################

# Dionne et al. "The role of leadership in shared"

How does leadership (LMX vs participative) influence shared mental model formation? How does the connectivity of the team (network structure) moderate which leadership style is appropriate? How does homogenous vs heterogeneous expertise moderate the effects of leadership?


ABM

(1) problem representation task

Problem domain between 0 and 100, with each domain expressed as a value between 0 and 1. The objective of the team is to collectively estimate the shape of the true performance function as accurately as possible (TPF). 

(2) each agent

Has his own individual problem function, which is created by adding noise to the true problem function. 

(3) domains of expertise

a: heterogenous domains of expertise

Each agent randomly receives a window sized between 0 and 50 within the 0 to 100 problem domain. In that range, the agent's IPF exactly matches the TPF. In other words, the agent is an expert for that domain.

b: homogenous domains of expertise

[this should really be called, "independent, non-experts."
[homogenous implies that they are all experts in the same way. Or they are all stupid in the same way.]
[really what is going on is that they are all stupid in independent ways]

No window of expertise. 

"This represents a condition in which all IPFs look similar." False, it isn't that all IPFs look similar, it is that they are all wrong with the same magnitude, but they are wrong in independent ways. 

(4) individual confidence for each topic 

For each topic, agents have confidence that sum to 1. Agent A has 0.5, B 0.1, C 0.2, etc. 

Originally, I thought this was individual and directional (e.g., A has self-confidence, and a unique confidence for all other members, for each topic). No so, instead, it is global. Confidence is public. It is more like ranking. A's rank on topic 1 is 0.5, B's rank on topic B is 0.1

[I thought agent's had perceptions of others. But this is not happening]
Each agent has a perceived confidence of others for each topic. My confidence for john on topic 1 is 0.4. My confidence for Susan on topic 1 is 0.2. 

(5) select a speaker

The most talkative/self-confident agent is selected to speak

(6) speaker selects a topic

Select the topic for which the agent has the greatest confidence to speak about.

Express the value of your IPF on that topic.

(7) evaluate speaker

How different is the expressed opinion from the evaluator's IPF? [d, between 0 and 1]
How confident is the evaluator on the spoken topic? [c, between 0 and 1]

response by evaluator is
r = (1-2d) * c(-1<r<1)

If difference is less than 0.5, then thumbs up. 
If evaluator is confident on topic, then his response is magnified.

(8) based on team responses, push the agent's confidence/rank on topic x up or down

Using a trangular function. If majority think it was a good expression, then push his rank up.

Normalize all team members's ranks to conserve their sum to 1.

(9) change own IPF

If speaker is evaluated positively, then change my IPF on topic 1 toward the speaker's IPF on topic 1 by a factor of 0.001.

(10) all of the above happens only among members connected on a network.


(11) output

Convergence
- total disagreement among members (0 = no disagreement)

Quality of group level PF
- difference between group PF and true PF

Group level PF is obtained by aggregating IPFs of all team members for a given topic. Use the average confidence values given to each member for a specific location in the problem domain as a weight.
- ok, they say "average confidence values given to each member" here. So indeed, each agent has a unique confidence value for every other agent. It isn't a rank.









(1) problem representation task

Problem domain between 0 and 100, with each topic expressed as a value between 0 and 1. The objective of the team is to collectively estimate the shape of the true performance function as accurately as possible (TPF). 

(2) agent characteristics

Talkativeness

IPF = individual problem function. A value for each topic, which is created by adding noise to the TPF. 

Confidence
- 0 to 1 self confidence for each topic
- 0 to 1 confidence for others on each topic
- sum to 1 across members for each topic


(3) domains of expertise

a: heterogenous domains of expertise

Each agent randomly receives a window sized between 0 and 50 within the 0 to 100 problem domain. In that range, the agent's IPF exactly matches the TPF. In other words, the agent is an expert for that domain.

b: homogenous domains of expertise

[this should really be called, "independent, non-experts."
[homogenous implies that they are all experts in the same way. Or they are all stupid in the same way.]
[really what is going on is that they are all stupid in independent ways]

No window of expertise. 

"This represents a condition in which all IPFs look similar." False, it isn't that all IPFs look similar, it is that they are all wrong with the same magnitude, but they are wrong in independent ways. 


(4) select a speaker

The most talkative agent is selected to speak

(5) speaker selects a topic

Select the topic for which the agent has the greatest confidence to speak.

Express the value of your IPF on that topic.

(6) evaluate speaker

How different is the expressed opinion from the evaluator's IPF? [d, between 0 and 1]
How confident is the evaluator on the spoken topic? [c, between 0 and 1]

response by evaluator is
r = (1-2d) * c(-1<r<1)

If difference is less than 0.5, then thumbs up. 
If evaluator is confident on topic, then his response is magnified.

(7) evaluator change impressions of speaker

If I gave the speaker a thumbs up, then I increase my perception of confidence in that speaker.

If I gave the speaker a thumbs up, then I change my own IPF toward the value on the topic expressed by the speaker (by a factor of 0.001). 

(8) speaker change impression of self?

Not specified. But perhaps the speaker then changes his own confidence.


(9) all of the above happens only among members connected on a network.


(10) output

Convergence
- total disagreement among members (0 = no disagreement)

Quality of group level PF
- difference between group PF and true PF

Group level PF is obtained by aggregating IPFs of all team members for a given topic. Use the average confidence values given to each member for a specific location in the problem domain as a weight.
- ok, they say "average confidence values given to each member" here. So indeed, each agent has a unique confidence value for every other agent. It isn't a rank.




#dionne
#leadership-quarterly-simulations









################################# Ways to improve
#################################
#################################
#################################


Getting caught in a rut. Hot stove effect. Unwilling to sample high variance alternatives. A leader needs to force sampling of high variance alternatives. Slow learning. 
- or, change members. forced turnover






---

Talkativeness is a trait which allows people to endure. It gives people repeated samples. 
- set up
- basic framework that we saw above
- speaker proposes tactic. That tactic has a return drawn from N(0, sigma).
- smart people propose tactics with higher means, but they also have higher variances
- if negative, then those individuals are not selected to speak again
- to overcome high variance (for a solution you know is right), you have to be talkative and assertive so that your tactic gets implemented again and again and again, even when it fails. 


Leader emergence opening. Ongoing conversation. Cool models, but speaker selection was random. Not true in real settings. In real settings, the performance of someone in the past matters. If you screwed up, you don't get to speak. 

---






Knowledge representation relates to Cronin's paper about rgaps. When speaking with someone about a complex problem, I need to be able to understand two things: (1) they have a different window of the true performance function than I do; (2) their window could be totally wrong. 
- paper idea: when do you want idiots on your team? answer: when the landscape changes such that idiots could become genius when the landscape changes







































# O'Connell & Marks, 2021 "Are the effects of intelligence..."

We know that life outcomes are a function of cognitive ability. A common critique of CA: since socioeconomic background is the major influence on CA, then observed effects of CA (on life outcomes) are simply proxy effects for socioeconomic background. 

This "critique" is wrong
- SES influences some but not all CA
- CA is heritable
- SES only deters CA if you have extreme poverty

This paper demonstrates that CA is a  much stronger predictor of teen life outcomes compared to SES.


keywords
- cognitive ability
- intelligence
- life success
- socioeconomic status



#intelligence












# Pinter-Wollman, 2012 "Personality in social insects: How does worker personality determine colony personality?"

Proposes three mechanisms which lead to between-colony differences in behavior. 

(1) colonies differ in their average of worker personality

(2) the distribution but not the average of worker personalities varies across colonies

(3) colony personality does not emerge from its worker personality composition but from consistent external constraints

Consistent behavioral differences among colonies result from local environments that vary consistently across time and/or situations. For example, two colonies comprised of workers with similar average activity and similar distribution of activities among workers may vary in how they respond to the environment if the nest entrance of one colony is always more shaded e.g., because it is under a tree, than the nest entrance of the other colony. Because higher temperatures elicit higher worker activity (Azcarate et al., 2007), the shaded colony will always be less responsive to changes in its environment than the colony that is in the sun.




keywords
- emergence
- aggregate
- collective performance
- aggregating methods
- aggregating functions


#aggregating-function
#collective-action
#collective-performance


























# Avin et al., 2015 "Homophily and the glass ceiling effect..."

Propose three independent "social network" mechanisms, each of which can produce glass ceilings. 

(1) rich get richer

Newly created wealth is distributed among members in proportion to the amount they already have amassed. 

People try to connect more often to people who already have many connections.

(2) minority-majority partition

Fewer women enter a given career than men. Fewer proportion of women to start with.

(3) homophily

People tend to associate with others who are similar to themselves. 




Model

The process starts with an arbitrary initial network in which each vertex has an arbitrary color, red or blue. This initial network evolves in time as follows. In every time step t a new vertex v enters the network. This vertex is red with probability r and blue with probability 1-r. On arrival, the vertex v chooses an existing vertex w to attach to with probability p proportional to w's degree at time t. Next, if w's color is the same as v's color, then an edge is inserted between v and w; if the colors differ, then the edge is inserted with probability p, and with probability 1-p the selection is rejected, and the process of choosing a neighbor for v is restarted. This process is repeated until some edge has been inserted. Thus in each time step, one new vertex and one new edge are added to the existing graph.
- homophily is edge creation/rejection
- degree is rich get richer
- minority-majority is how many incoming vertices are red, and the initial allocation of red in the base network
- r is minority-majority, p is homophily


Consider as an example for our model the social network of mentor-student relationships in academia. With time, new PhD students arrive, but for some fields female students arrive at a lower rate than male students. Upon arrival, each student needs to select exactly one mentor, where the selection process is governed by the mechanisms of preferential attachment and homophily. Namely, initially the student selects the mentor according to the rules of preferential attachment and then homophily takes its role, rejecting the selection with some probability if their gender is different enforcing a re-selection. Over time, graduated students may become mentors and some mentors become more successful than others (in terms of the number of students they advise). A glass ceiling effect can be observed in this network if, after a long enough time interval, the fraction of females among the most successful mentors tends to zero.







Note
- inference mistake
- "equality of opportunity is important," but then they simply list how outcomes differ between men and women. Stop making this mistake. Outcomes are not opportunities. 
- "Women don't get cited as much as men, so clearly there is a glass ceiling effect." what?
- "Women earn less than men, so clearly there is a glass ceiling effect." what? 


Note
- very good "here is what comes from our model" intro
- great end of hook
- mimic hook, specially the part, "as a running example serving"








keywords
- agent based model
- networks
- glass ceiling
- opportunity outcomes wrong inference
- mimic intro
- writing example


#glass-ceiling
#agent-based-modeling
#networks
#misogyny
#women-career-mobility


















# The Proof Of Worth

Though victory’s proof of the skill you possess,
Defeat is the proof of your grit;
A weakling can smile in his days of success,
But at trouble’s first sign he will quit.
So the test of the heart and the test of your pluck
Isn’t skies that are sunny and fair,
But how do you stand to the blow that is struck
And how do you battle despair?
 
A fool can seem wise when the pathway is clear
And it’s easy to see the way out,
But the test of man’s judgment is something to fear,
And what does he do when in doubt?
And the proof of his faith is the courage he shows
When sorrows lie deep in his breast;
It’s the way that he suffers the griefs that he knows
That brings out his worst or his best.
 
The test of a man is how much he will bear
For a cause which he knows to be right,
How long will he stand in the depths of despair,
How much will he suffer and fight?
There are many to serve when the victory’s near
And few are the hurts to be borne,
But it calls for a leader of courage to cheer
The men in a battle forlorn.
 
It’s the way you hold out against odds that are great
That proves what your courage is worth,
It’s the way that you stand to the bruises of fate
That shows up your stature and girth.
And victory’s nothing but proof of your skill,
Veneered with a glory that’s thin,
Unless it is proof of unfaltering will,
And unless you have suffered to win.

Edgar Guest



#poem
#quote
#philosophy


















# Green & Shou, "Modeling community population dynamics with the open..."

Predator prey discrete time modeling in R.

I used this paper as a model for my "approximating differential equations" computational note.

keywords
- r simulations
- predator prey dynamics
- lotka-volterra
- population dynamics
- differential equations



















# Simon, 1990 "A mechanism for social selection and successful altruism"

Docile persons tend to learn and believe what they perceive others in the society want them to learn and believe. Thus the content of what is learned will not be fully screened for its contribution to personal fitness. This tendency derives from the difficulty -- often an imposibility -- for individuals to evaluate beliefs for their potential positive or negative contribution to fitness. For example, many of us believe that less cholesterol would be beneficial to our health without reviewing (or even being competent to review) the medical evidence. Hundreds of millions of people believe that behaving in a socially acceptable way will enhance the probability of enjoying blissful immortality.

It is often hard to separate, "I'm doing this because it directly increases my fitness" from "I'm doing this because society wants me to, or because it is popular in society."

Simon's point
- when the "society wants me to" things correlated with the "these things directly help my fitness," then I will have very strong motivations to be docile even when it may not contribute to my fitness. 


keywords
- social influence
- herbert simon




















# March, Sproull, & Tamuz, 1991, "learning from samples of one or fewer"

Bad paper but cool hook idea:

How do you learn from experience when you only have one sample?
- a military has rarely fought in battle, yet it wants to learn from its history
- An airline rarely has fatal accidents, yet it wants to learn from its history how to reduce disasters.
- A firm rarely makes major market discoveries. Yet it wanst to learn from its history how to increase the chances of such innovations.





keywords
- organizational learning
- small samples
- learning from few samples
- learning from rare events



#learning-from-few-examples
#organizational-learning
#small-samples








# Diversity Issues


You shouldn't lose your job for entertaining ideas. You shouldn't be kicked out of social life for entertaining ideas.


0)

People interpret ambiguous encounters in the least favorable way




1)

HUGE DIVERSITY POINT. IT OFTEN MISSES COGNITIVE INTEGRATION. WHY I TEND TO LIKE CONSERVATIVES: THEY DEMONSTRATE COGNITIVE INTEGRATION. GLENN LOURY IS A MASTER OF COGNITIVE INTEGRATION. Summarize your view in a way that you would agree with. Steel manning. Degree to which you can translate between perspectives and thus, understanding the intended meaning of what others communicate. 



Take the "diversity in the classroom" paper from SDSU and compare that to "a cognitive scientist explains what to do in the classroom." Are you telling me that the fundamentals of learning


2)

You are not allowed to say "the family matters" when explaining black behavior. You are allowed to say "the family matters; socialization matters" when explaining women behavior (e.g., why aren't there more women engineers?). 

So, you are saying that we can't use an explanation if race is involved but we can use the explanation if race isn't involved. That's racist is it not?


3)

# what people against "i don't see color" miss

"I see no color" is not the goal.

"I see your color and I honor you. I value your input. I will be educated about your lived experiences. I will work against racism that harms you. You are beautiful. And I will do better." That's the goal


That's not the point of the "i see no color" idea. The point is to not use race for job selection. The point is to not say, "we are hiring you because you are black." The point is not to say, "we are hiring you because you are beautiful."





keywords
- diversity
- diversity delusion
- diversity comebacks


#diversity-delusion
#anti-woke
#sjw





























# Schmiedek et al., 2013 "Keeping it steady: older adults..."

People don't experience bad days, they experience bad moments that are memorable. Your actual performance across the day is consistent.


keywords
- momentary performance
- cognitive aging
- motivation


#motivation
#aging
#performance
#momentary-performance



























# stop hesitating to love. 


To deny love for fear of suffering, is like refusing to live for fear of dying.

Jim Morrison.

How could it be a mistake to love someone completely?


#quote
#philosophy
















# Peysakhovich & Rand, 2016 "Habits of virtue: creating norms of cooperation..."

Put people into "cooperative prisoner's dilemma" games and they will behave in cooperative ways in future PD games. Put people into "selfish prisoner's games" and they will behave selfishly in future games.



What explains variability in norms of cooperation across organizations and cultures? One answer comes from the tendency of individuals to internalize typically successful behaviors as norms. Different institu- tional structures can cause different behavioral norms to be internalized. These norms are then carried over into atypical situations beyond the reach of the institution. Here, we experimentally demonstrate such spillovers. First, we immerse subjects in environments that do or do not support cooperation using repeated prisoner’s dilemmas. Afterwards, we measure their intrinsic prosociality in one-shot games. Subjects from environments that support cooperation are more prosocial, more likely to punish selfishness, and more trusting in general.



keywords
- cooperation
- motivation
- game theory


#cooperation
#motivation
#habits
#norms

























# Greenwald "free speech journalists"

Thus do we have the unimaginably warped dynamic in which US journalists are not the defenders of free speech values but the primary crusadors to destroy them. They do it in part for power: to ensure nobody but they can control the flow of information. They do it partly for ideology and out of hubris: the belief that their worldview is so indisputably right that all dissent is inherently dangerous "disinformation." And they do it from petty vindictiveness: they clearly get aroused by destroying people's reputations and lives, no matter how powerless. Whatever the motive, corporate media employees whoe company title is "journalist" are the primary activistss against a free and open internet and the core values of free thought.

keywords
- free speech
- cancel culture
- journalism
- left bias
 

#anti-woke
#free-speech
#cancel-culture
#left-bias
#journalists-suck






























# Cheung Hui "Organizational learning from goal performance and aspirations"

Dissertation. Cool writing about org learning.

Organizational decision makers do not explore every possible alternative to maximize goal performance. On the contrary, they tend to maintain the status quo and make changes only if they perceive the goal performance as unsatisfactory. This means that organizational decision makers’ attention is problem-oriented.


The extant literature also largely focuses on learning from one goal, although organizations pursue multiple goals (Gavetti et al., 2012; Shinkle, 2012). There is a dominant rule of attending to multiple goals in the literature—the sequential-attention rule proposed by Cyert & March (1963) and later validated by Greve (2008). This rule suggests that decision makers attend to a goal at a time and move on to another goal when the previous one’s performance is above the aspiration level. 


#organizational-learning
#strategy
#learning



















# Kee et al., 2012 "One hundred tasks an hour: an observational study of emergency department consultant activities"

In emergency departments, people mutli task alot and they work on many, many different tasks across the day




keywords
- task sampling



#tasks
#multi-tasking
















# Sullivan on SAT testing

Great paper on why SAT is useful, and why doing away with it would actually hurt minorities. 

SAT testing is not racist.


"Congressman Jamaal Bowman of New York: “Standardized testing is a pillar of systemic racism.”

His argument is pure Kendi: the results are solely and exclusively what determines if a test is racist. Not the test itself; not evidence about its fairness or otherwise; not data about how it is constructed; not studies that examine its effects alongside every other way of measuring academic potential. Just the results. 

There is no countering this argument because it is not an argument. It is a threat. All it tells us is that the power of the term “white supremacist” will be ruthlessly deployed to shut down anyone who dares to argue that the SAT is, in fact, the least culturally biased of all measurements, the one thing wealthy kids cannot buy, and the most helpful tool in discovering the potential of poor, first-generation immigrant, black and Hispanic children, and rescuing them from the restrictions of class as well as race. "

"A key moment in this debate came last year after the influential and massive California higher education system commissioned a deep, scholarly report on the SATs, conducted by their own academics over eighteen months. What the exhaustive study found was that the SAT remains the best measurement available to find capable students who are black, poor, or first-generation immigrant."


https://andrewsullivan.substack.com/p/killing-the-sat-means-hurting-minorities-fad


keywords
- cognitive ability testing
- intelligence testing
- anti racism
- woke


#anti-woke
#sjw
#intelligence
#sat-act











# McWhorter on Georgetown professor that got fired

https://johnmcwhorter.substack.com/p/so-there-was-a-law-professor-at-georgetown


keywords
- woke
- anti racist


#anti-woke
#sjw










# Sullivan critique of Biden

https://andrewsullivan.substack.com/p/bidens-revolution-takes-shape-8ee

































# "A letter to the male 'good apples' about how you may be viewed by your female colleagues"

Open letter to white male academic colleagues.

Someone complaining about being a female in academia. 

keywords
- woke
- poor writing
- why i left academia
- entitlement
- negativity into everything
- feminism crazy



#woke
#academese
#crazy-feminism










# Greve 2021 "Safe or profitable? The pursuit of conflicting..."

How do organizations pursue conflicting goals?

When a goal falls below aspirations, action is triggered. But what about with two or more conflicting goals?

The goal perceived as more important for survival gets priority. 

Data from airlines. 




keywords
- motivation
- goals
- self regulation
- multiple goals
- goal conflict



#motivation
#goals
#organizational-learning
#strategy
#multiple-goals
#self-regulation




















# Weiss dissertation "An examination of employee coachability and managerial coaching..."

Employees need to be coachable, which consists of:
- feedback seeking
- feedback receptive
- implementation of feedback


Individual antecedents to coachability
- learning goal orientation
- feedback orientation
- proactive personality
- expressed humility
- achievement striving
- ego defense
- instrumental motive


keywords
- coachability
- performance
- training
- human resource management



#performance-management
#coachable
#feedback
#human-resource-management

































# Nagle, 2019 "Open source software and firm productivity"

For firms with an ecosystem of complements, a 1% increase in the use of non- pecuniary OSS leads to an increase in value-added productivity of between 0.002% and 0.008%. 

So, firms that use open sourcing are a tiny, tiny bit more productive.

keywords
- organizational performance
- open source
- software

#open-source
























# Matt Taibbi quote

Matt Taibbi on news media outlets:

"We can't let bad ideas out there. People will be charmed by bad ideas, they will spread, and bad social consequences will occur. We have to censor everything."

These officials don't seem to understand that when audiences see that a platform is putting its thumb on the scale and making a political decision to "save viewers from bad ideas" -- that action inspires lack of trust in the media. That censorship behavior inspires behavior just as much as being exposed to an idea inspires a reaction. 

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/d___TFU_CAc

#quote
#media
#news























# Sitkin et al., 2011 "The paradox of stretch goals"

stretch goals: seemingly impossible goals. Perhaps they prompt innovation and performance.


keywords
- motivation
- self regulation



#goals
#motivation
#self-regulation
#stretch-goals
























# Feldman "Synergy in mergers and acquisitions"

Can't make heads or tails of it but should be cited in a paper about synergy.

keywords
- synergy
- aggregating function
- whole greater than sum of its parts



#synergy
#aggregating-function





































# Leibbrandt & List "Do women avoid salary negotiations?"

If it's ambiguous whether salary negotiating is appropriate, men are more likely to negotiate. 

keywords
- gender pay gap
- sex differences in negotiating


#sex-differences
#anti-woke
#sjw
#negotiation






 








############### WITHIN BETWEEN IDEAS


############### WITHIN BETWEEN IDEAS




# Curren & Bauer, "The disaggregation of within-person and between-person effects in longitudinal models of change"


Great examples of within between person









Within between

(a) inducing neg correlation

High on ability A. High on ability B. Among your limited sample, there is a negative correlation among A and B.

(b) examples

https://slate.com/human-interest/2014/06/berksons-fallacy-why-are-handsome-men-such-jerks.html

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkson%27s_paradox

https://erikbern.com/2020/01/13/how-to-hire-smarter-than-the-market-a-toy-model.html

The key:
- members of the population expressing the full range of properties are unobserved

The most common example of Berkson's paradox is a false observation of a negative correlation between two positive traits, i.e., that members of a population which have some positive trait tend to lack a second. Berkson's paradox occurs when this observation appears true when in reality the two properties are unrelated—or even positively correlated—because members of the population where both are absent are not equally observed.

In other words, given two independent events, if you consider only outcomes where at least one occurs, then they become negatively dependent.

---

Interview score X
Programming competition success Y

Among those hired, there is an artificial negative correlation among those two qualities.

---
Sales performance X
Expected future manager ability Y

Among those promoted to managers, there is an artificial negative correlation among management performance and sales performance

--
Attractiveness X and Talent Y are uncorrelated in the population. Someone sampling the population using celebrities may wrongly infer that talent is negatively correlated with attractiveness (people who are attractive are not talented), as people who are neither talented nor attractive do not become celebrities. 

--
Quality of burger X
Quality of fries X

Relationship is positive. But you never eat at places where both are bad, so you infer an artificial negative correlation among quality of burger and quality of fries. 

--
Handsome men X
Nice men Y

Relationship is positive. But you never date ungly, mean men. So you perceive an artificial negative correlation among handsomeness and integrity. 

--
Quality of book on X
Popularity on Y

Relationship is positive. Among those that you become aware of through a popularity filter, though, there is an artificial negative correlation.

The novels you read are either popular or good. Within that group, the good ones are less likely to be popular. 

There are two reasons you might have read book BB. Either it is exactly the kind of book you enjoy or because it won a prize and became popular.









write about it

you consider only cases where 1 is observed, you induce negative dependence.

select on attractiveness
select on nice

among my dating sample, there is an artificial negative correlation among attractiveness and niceness

select on quality of burger
select on quality of fry

among the restaurants I go to, there is an artificial negative correlation

select on programming competition success and interview performance, there is an artificial negative correlation.






my own trajectory
I only think about my satisfaction and performance at time X



observing someone elses
I only see Christopher at times X

Performanc and Satisfaction





############### WITHIN BETWEEN IDEAS

############### WITHIN BETWEEN IDEAS




#within-between
























# Andrew Delton on what makes people cooperate

What makes people cooperate?
- shadow of the future: believing interactions will continue into the future
- unique relationship: our coordination is seamless and I like this person.
- need of recipient: people offer help to high need people (why give a loaf of bread to someone who is satiated?)
- recipient is likely to reciprocate: people help others when they believe the other person will reciprocate

Sznycer, Delton, Robertson et al., "the ecological rationality of helping others..."

keywords
- cooperation
- helping
- citizenship
- evolution



#cooperation
#ocb
#reciprocity








# Delton et al., "Evolution of direct reciprocity under uncertainty can explain ..."


Evolutionary and economic theories predict that humans shouldn't be generous in one-shot situations. But we are. Why?

Because deciding whether an interaction is one-shot or repeated is uncertain. It is subject to noise. 

It is better to mistake a one shot game for a repeated game than it is to mistake a repeated game for a one-shot game.
- as a byproduct, people have a tendency to cooperate even in one-shot games


research ideas
- evolution simulation but with performance. PDs but with performance.
- what social situations cause people to infer one-shot interactions?


keywords
- cooperation
- evolution of cooperation
- reciprocity

#cooperation
#reciprocity
#evolution-of-cooperation

























# Our world data

https://ourworldindata.org/a-history-of-global-living-conditions-in-5-charts

Lots of things have gone way down over the last 20 years
- extreme poverty
- people uneducated/illiterate
- child mortality


keywords
- world trends
- global living conditions
- economics
- world improvement

#world-trends
#economics
#our-world-data






# Levari et al., "Prevalence-induced concept change in human judgement"

As our concept of "racism" becomes less prevalent, we expand our definition of it to include things that in the past would not have counted as racism. 

When blue dots become rare, purple dots began to look blue; when threatening faces became rare, neutral faces began to appear thretening; and when unethical research proposals became rare, ambiguous research proposals began to seem unethical. This happened even when the change in the prevalence of instances was abrupt, even when participants were explicitly told that the prevalence of instances would change, and even when participants were instructed and paid to ignore these changes.

Although modern societies have made extraordinary progress in solving a wide range of social problems, from poverty to illiteracy to violence and infant mortality, the majority of people believe that the world is getting worse. The fact that concepts grow larger when their instances grow smaller may be one source of that pessimism. 

keywords
- expanding definitions
- social psychology
- systemic racism
- moving the goal post
- woke



#prevalence-change
#anti-woke
#moving-the-goal-post



























# US women's soccer pay gap is a myth

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LLeAWuRbObQ


#anti-woke
#sjw
#pay-gap











# Unintended consequences

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-1u_S1ANsrA


#unintended-consequences











# 93% of women think workplace flirting is inappropriate

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VIyip-c9XHY


#anti-woke
#flirting













# top 10 statistics fallacies

https://twitter.com/MaartenvSmeden/status/1356147552362639366


(1) Statistical significance is not the same as clinical importance

(2) Ecological fallacy

Drawing inferences about individuals from aggregated (non individual) data

In 19th century Europe, suicide rates were higher in countries that were more heavily Protestant, the inference being that suicide was promoted by the social conditions of Protestantism (Durkheim 1897; also see Neeleman and Lewis 1999). According to Carroll (1975), death rates from breast cancer are higher in countries where fat is a larger component of the diet, the idea being that fat intake causes breast cancer. These are ‘ecological inferences,’ that is, inferences about individual behavior drawn from data about aggregates.

The ecological fallacy consists in thinking that relationships observed for groups necessarily hold for individuals: if countries with more Protestants tend to have higher suicide rates, then Protestants must be more likely to commit suicide; if countries with more fat in the diet have higher rates of breast cancer, then women who eat fatty foods must be more likely to get breast cancer. These inferences may be correct, but are only weakly supported by the aggregate data.


(3) simpson's paradox

This is the multi-level modeling paradox:

the relationship across all individuals is -0.4. When accounting for groups, the relationship is 0.6. 

With more police officers, rates of crime are higher. But within counties, with more police officers, rates of crime are lower. 



(4) berkson's paradox

False observation of a relationship due to sampling.

In the population, there is no relationship between conscientiousness andn G. But I select on both of those factors to hire people. In my org, I will witness a spurious, negative correlation between conscientiousness and G. 

I believe that there is a negative correlation between attractiveness and friendliness. That's because I only sample people who meet both thresholds. 


(5) Gambler's fallacy

When I witness a bunch of heads in a row, the next coin flip will be a tail.




keywords
- fallacies
- statistical insights
- sampling

#statistics-fallacies








# Zach Goldberg whites are now most hated group twitter

https://twitter.com/ZachG932/status/1375200721432412160

White liberals hate white people. 

Huge uptik in the words "racist/racism" at popular news outlets.

Group disparities does not equal discrimination.
https://zachgoldberg.substack.com/p/exposing-the-group-disparities-discrimination


keywords
- woke studies
- woke scholar
- ibram kendi
- anti white bias


Other woke pushback
- https://www.fairforall.org/about/board-of-advisors/
- https://twitter.com/fairforall_org/status/1389987876067168262
- https://twitter.com/becomethesignal
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2KyG8MukuCY

#anti-woke
#sjw











# Brown, Anicich, & Galinsky, 2020 "Compensatory conspicuous communication"


Low status increases jargon use. Low status makes people concerned that they aren't good enough, so they start using a lot of jargon to signal that they are better than they truly are.

Evidence: PhDs from terrible schools have long, terrible titles

keywords
- jargon
- language
- shitty writing
- good writing


#academese
#jargon
#status















# Gelman says that academia, like any other work environment, is full of successful, prominent people who have no idea what they are talking about

https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2020/05/14/so-much-of-academia-is-about-connections-and-reputation-laundering/

Every field has lots of people at the top who don't have any idea what they are doing or talking about.

keywords
- science
- performance
- luck


#science-of-science
#luck
#false-experts
#academese

















# Guthier, Dormann, & Voelkle, "Reciprocal effects between job stressors"

Conclusions are limited because few primary studies used more than two measurement occasions. 

THEN WHY ARE WE USING COMPLICATED CONTINUOUS TIME MODELS?

keywords
- longitudinal
- dynamics














# Mulder & Hamaker, 2020, "three extensions of the cross lagged panel model"

code
- https://github.com/JeroenDMulder/RI-CLPM/blob/master/lavaan.Rmd

A RI-CLPM is the bollen and brand model but it doesn't condition on the first observation.

three extensions
- stable, person-level predictor
- multiple group version
- multiple indicators


keywords
- dynamic modeling
- cross lagged panel model












# Giudice, 2019 "Invisible designers: brain evolution through the lens of parasite manipulation"

The nervous system evolved, at least partly, in response to parasites. It developed countermeasures. This article discusses what parasites do and how hosts may have developed countermeasures to ward off parasite manipulation.

"How much of the complex process of wiring a brain during development is to prevent pathogen manipulation?"

Why do parasites use hosts?
- transport the parasite to new areas
- use the host as a bodygaurd
- transmission: make the host bite others or become paralized so it it easy prey, and once the next animal comes in contact with the host, the new animal becomes infected

Mechanisms of attack by the parasite
- destroy tissue
- increase or decrease immune activity
- modify gene expression and protein synthesis
- secrete serotonin or dopamine

Countermeasures possibly employed by hosts
- blood-brain barrier: keep parasites out of the CNS
- decoy molecules: molecules that essentially do nothing in the human body but that look like an important molecule for the parasite to latch onto
- make receptors that respond to immune activity or neurotransmitters less sensitive
- increase the complexity of signals (more pathways, more molecules, different timing mechanisms (some take seconds, others hours))
- become robust by having a lot of redundancy...things do the same task
- become robust by using modularity


keywords
- evolution
- biology
- neuroscience


#neuroscience
#brain-parasites












# Eiko "on theory"

https://eiko-fried.com/on-theory/

We don't have methods to generate, develop, and fully appraise theories, so in turn theories tend to neither be refuted nor corroborated but fade away as people lose interest.


keywords
- formal theory
- theory
- verbal


#formal-theory







# Mottus et al., 2017 "Computational modeling of person-situation transactions"

Good paper on the purpose of computational modeling.
Content:
- extraversion people seek out social stimulation
- over time, this makes them more extraverted
- and then they seek out more social stimulation
- reverse for introverted people
- so, you should see an increase in personality variance


How do experiences accumulate and produce differences in personality?

Cool writing on, "this process may be too complex to handle via verbal theories."




It has been previously hypothesized that, ceteris paribus, systematic person-environment transactions should entail increases in the magnitude of individual differences (Mõttus et al., 2016, 2017). That is, when people choose which situations to attend and how to shape and interpret these situations, they are likely to do this in ways that match their pre-existing characteristics, and these self-selected/created experiences are then likely to accentuate the preexisting characteristics even more. As Roberts and colleagues (2003) put it: “the most likely effect of life [situational] experience on personality development is to deepen the characteristics that lead people to those experiences [situations] in the first place.” However, although there is evidence for increases in the variance of personality characteristics until early adolescence (Mõttus et al., 2017), the magnitude of individual differences appears relatively constant thereafter. Among other possible explanations, it has been hypothesized that this may be because an allegedly variance-decreasing effect of random influences countervails the allegedly varianceincreasing effect of person-environment transactions (Mõttus et al., 2016). The current simulations, however, suggest that the intuition might have been wrong. Perhaps the accumulation of systematic situational experiences does not entail the accentuation of individual differences in the sense of increasing variance after all. And yet the accumulation of such experiences may still influence individuals’ characteristics in systematic ways as was suggested by increases of the correlations among agents’ characteristics. This may suggest that individuals do carve themselves social niches that match their pre-existing characteristics and thereby deepen these characteristics, but such accentuation of individual differences reflects more
subtle repositioning in the personality feature space rather than linearly growing in particular directions. Thus, the simulation results may in fact reconcile the corresponsive principle and current empirical findings pertaining to developmental trends in the magnitude of individual differences.






keywords
- great writing on the purpose of computational modeling


#computational-modeling
#persons-situations
#simulate-person-environment











# westfall dissertation: "Optimal design of psychological experiments with multiple random factors"

http://jakewestfall.org/publications/dissertation.pdf


You would never dream of running a psych experiment with only 8 subjects (and a cross-sectional design making a between-person comparison). Similarly, we shouldn't dream of using only 8 stimuli to have participants respond to.

In psych experiments, participants respond to the same stimuli. But those stimuli are drawn from a universe of possible stimuli. We are strong on participant power but weak on stimuli power. As such, our ability to generalize beyond a particular stimuli is weak. 


keywords
- replication crisis
- theory in psychology
- experimental methods
- methods
- power analysis

#stats
#replication-crisis






# westfall "Statisticall controlling for confounding constructs is harder than you think"

Claims of incremental validity are f'd because of measurement error.

Incremental validity is everywhere:
“If measurements of construct X correlate significantly with outcome Y even when controlling for existing measure(s) Z, then X is a useful predictor of Y, over and above Z.”

We often use indicators of X and indicators of Z and indicators of Y. Our measures demonstrate incremental validity, but generalizing to incremental validity of latent constructs is erroneous. 

Example: swimming pool deaths, ice cream, and heat. 

Swimming pool deaths are greater when more ice cream is sold. Is there a relationship betweeen ice cream sales and swimming pool deaths? No, there is a common cause: heat. When I control for heat, there is no incremental predictive validity of swimming pool deaths (when predicting ice cream sales). But say heat is measured subjectively. Regress ice cream sales on swimming pool deaths but control for the subjectively measured perceptions of heat. There will still be a relationship between swimming pool deaths and ice cream sales.

To be confident that an incremental validity argument is sound, one would need to either ensure perfect measurement reliability or formally account for unreliability in one's model. 

The solution is to use SEM to model measurement error. 


#incremental-validity





Jacob Westfall on experiments as things to sample ("optimal design of psychological experiments" and "statistically controlling for confounding constructs")

http://jakewestfall.org/publications/dissertation.pdf

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0152719










# https://gwallentin.github.io/UNIGIS_spatsim/system-dynamics.html#linear-growth















######## # selection simulation notes



# Converse & Oswald, "Thinking Ahead: Assuming Linear..."

A simulation describing how firms perform if they assume linear (curvilinear-linear) relationships between predictors and criterion variables.

Good practice simulation for newbies. Unfortunately, it isn't explained well.

Simulation Summary
- DGP where job performance = IV1 + IV2
- DGP where job performance = IV1 + IV1^2 + IV2
- Use a selection mechanism to decide who gets hired based on IV1 and IV2
- Among those hired, look at their job performance

Simulation

(a) generate predictors

Conscientiousness
Emotional stability

They can be correlated if desired

(b) set criterion-related validites and errors

(c) use validities, errors, and predictors to generate DV

job performance = C + E
- linear relationship

job performance = C + C^2 + E
- curvilinear relationship
- see page 9 for how to calculate inflection point

(d) decide who to hire based on C and E

Unit-weighted composite scheme:
- add an applicant's C and E scores together
- do that for every applicant
- select the applicants with the best scores
- if your selection ratio is 0.5, select 50% of applicants

Curvlinear scheme:
- change C scores to "distance from inflection point" C scores
- i.e., greater distances from inflection point (above or below) mean lower scores on C
- now sum "distance score" C and regular E
- do that for every applicant
- select the applicants with the best scores

Regression weighted approach
- same as sum approach but include regression weights and mupltiply them by C and E

(e) determine performance

For the selected applicants, take the mean of their performance. 



Results
- mean performance of selected individuals is higher when selection ratio is lower
- mean performance of selected individuals is maximized when the decision approach matches the true DGP
- with high levels of selectivity (low selection ratios), assuming linear DGP when it is actually curvilinear is more detrimental than assuming curvilinear when it is actually linear.


"This is sensible because when there is a low selection ratio and an inverted-U-shaped relationship, selecting based on a linear assumption (i.e., selecting those high on the personality characteristic) involves hiring those who are on the downward slope of the relationship and thus relatively low in performance. However, with a low selection ratio and a linear relationship, selecting based on a curvilinear assumption (i.e., selecting those moderate on the personality characteristic) involves hiring those who are in the middle of the relationship and thus with average performance."




keywords
- selection simulation
- criterion validity
- psychometrics

#psychometrics
#selection-simulation




# The other oswald paper, "The utility of personnel selection decisions"


Simulation

(a) look at literature to find population relationships between variables

(cog ability, structured interview, conscientiousness, biodata, job performance)

use these as true values
correct them for unreliability on the DV
e.g., job performance unreliability is 0.52, so mutliply correlations by sqrt(0.52)

(b) use population scores to generate observed scores on each variable

observed = population mean * sqrt(reliability) + rnorm(1, 0, 1)*sqrt(1-reliability)

So, when reliability is higher, the standard deviation of the error score is lower

(c) select applicants based on one of two schemes

compensatory unit weighting:
- sum an applicant's observed IVs
- do the same for all applicants
- take the applicants with the greatest scores (according to selection ratio)

multiple hurdle
- sum an applicant's cognitive ability, consicentiousness, and biodata
- repeat for all applicants
- take applicants with the greatest scores
- of those selected applicants, rank according to observed interview score
- take the applicants with the greatest scores

of the selected applicants, witness their job performance

(d) calculate utility

U = (mean performance of selected applicants * monetary value of 1 SD difference in criterion performance * number of selected applicants) - (total sample size * cost per applicant)

The cost per applicant of using the multiple hurdle scheme was either 50%, 30%, or 10% cheaper than the compensatory scheme. 



results
- compensatory scheme yields higher mean performance relative to multiple-hurdle
++ especially so with high selectivity (lower selection ratio)
- with high selection ratios, the performance of both schemes is about the same
- with low validity predictors, the advantage (with respect to better realized performance) of compensatory selection over multiple-hurdle is miniscule.
- multiple-hurdle selection yields greater utility when it allows you to reduce cost per applicant to very, very small amounts. But in general, compensatory selection still produced higher utility in most conditions, indicating that the gain from using compensatory selection may outwiegh the cost savings from multiple hurdle selection.



Notice how crazy the code is. Matrix multiplication rather than tidyverse.
- https://osf.io/rzxeb/


#selection-simulation
#psychometrics



# Liu, 2021, "In luck we trust"

You need diverse cognitive repertoires among your teams to perform well. Random selection is an undervalued tool for capturing the diversity bonus.

Each candidate i's performance at period t is a combination of merit (Mi) and noise (Eit). Merit is time-invariant is drawn from a standard normal distribution (N(0,1)). Noise varies with time but is also drawn from a standard normal distribution. The lowest-performing 5% of candidates at each round are eliminated, while the rest progress to the next round. We are interested in how the average merit of those selected evolves.

The paradox of merit:
- the least skilled employees are weeded out, so average merit improves over periods
- their variance decreases over periods
- the merit improvement rate drops dramatically

Random selection can save orgs from wasting time in endless meetings in the later stages of recruitment trying to choose the best from an already good-enough pool of candidates. 

To capture the diversity bonus, orgs should avoid the best and instead engage in the luck of the draw among the rest. For later rounds of selection, the best candidates should be dismissed because they are decreasingly likely to provide additional diversity to an existing team. The rest of the candidates may appear worse, but their inferiority to the "best" signals useful differences that may contribute to the team's cognitive repertoire. 


#luck
#randomness





# ideas

Deliberation time. They didn't assess how long it takes. Yes, the cost is lower in multiple selection systems...but it also takes 2 periods rather than 1. Deliberation is costly.

Random selection after initial hurdle for diversity. Same as Lui but present in an IO context. 













# pleskac et al., "a detection model of college withdrawal"

Why do students withdraw from college?

- recruited by other institutions
- unexpected bad grade
- roomate conflicts
- lost financial aid
- become clincially depresssed
- large increase in tuition

great explanation on formal modeling

great explanation on the unfolding model of turnover being too complex

tests competing cognitive processes -- but I have no idea how
- change the observed data
- change the observed data
- run maximum likelihood
- take the coefficients and manipulate them
- then run a regression
- idk, seems weird

guassian model of college withdrawal
- everyday events form a distribution
- shocking events form a distribution
- samples from these distributions provide information
- once information rises above a threshold, the student leaves
- the everyday events distribution sits lower on the info axis than the shocking events distribution



keywords
- turnover
- formal model
- cognitive model
- mathematical modeling
- computational model



#turnover
#cognitive-compuational-model
#cognitive-modeling
#unfolding-model-of-turnover
#diffusion-model






# Myung 2000 "The importance of complexity in model selection"

Model selection should be based not solely on goodness-of-fit, but must also consider model complexity. While the goal of mathematical modeling in cognitive psychology is to select one model from a set of competing models that best captures the underlying mental process, choosing the model that best fits a particular set of data will not achieve this goal. This is because a highly complex model can provide a good fit without necessarily bearing any interpretable relationship with the underlying process. It is shown that model selection based solely on the fit to observed data will result in the choice of an unnecessarily complex model that overfits the data, and thus generalizes poorly.

Simulation
- DGP: y = x + x^2 + rnorm(1, 0, s)
- increase s from 0 to 20
- statistical model 1 = mean y
- true statistical model 2 = x + x^2 + e
- statistical model 3 = x + x^2 + x^3
- etc.

As error size (s) increases, the more complex models account for far more variance (i.e., they fit better) than the true model. This additional improvement in fit over and above the true model can be due only to the model's flexibility in to capture random error, not because it more accurately approximates the model that generated the data. 

The complex model also generalizes poorly to new data sets precisely because it overfits the first data set by absorbing random error. 

A mdoel should be selected based on its generalizability rather than its goodness of fit. 


keywords
- model complexity
- data generating processes
- theory of statistical modeling


#stats
#model-complexity





# Hintzman "Why are formal models useful in psychology"

Great quotes on using formal models.

"I'm skeptical of unaided, intuitive judgments concerning how specific theoretical assumptions relate to particular empirical results. Other people who work with formal models seem to share this distrust."

"Phenomenon X produce a variety of results: sometimes A happens, sometimes B happens, sometimes C happens. The standard view in psychology has been that these different patterns require for their explanation different sorts of mechanisms. However, formal models show that basically the same mechanisms can produce any of these results."

"Formal models show that such data patterns are not diagnostic of different systems."

"An effort to set up a formal model could have helped the authors avoid making a mathematically impossible claim."

Some foibles of human thought that seem directly relevant to scientific reasoning:

(a) working memory capacity

WM capacity constraints the number of concepts we can manipulate mentally at the same time. 

It is also hard to keep track of the current states of many variables.

Improved by formal modeling:
- execute steps one at a time
- intermediate and ongoing results recorded

(b) similarity

Similarity is the most important drive in our cognitive system. We judge likelihood based on ease of retrieval. We reason by analogy to familiar situations.

Improved by formal modeling:
- symbols are discrete, so even conceptually similar entities are not confused

(c) words are messy

A verbal argument can maintain apparent coherence when in fact it is not. 

We mistake slogans as explanations. 

Improved by formal modeling:
- if logical is garbled, the program will not run
- slogans are immediately seen as devoid of explanatory power

(d) emotion

We accept arguments based on whether we like the conclusion, not on the reasoning or logic. 

(e) beginner feeling

Once people know something, they find it difficult to remember what it was like not to know it. 

(f) confirmation bias





keywords
- formal modeling
- computational modeling
- theories suck




#formal-models
#mathematical-modeling
#phil-of-science










Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004
Oreopoulos, 2011
Gaddis, 2015



# Kang, DeCelles, Tilcsik, & Jun, 2016, "Whitened Resumes: race and self-presentation"

Create resumes with white sounding names vs black sounding names. Send resumes to actual job postings in different cities. See who gets emailed for an interview.

Of all applications sent, 15%ish received interview requests.

White applications received more interview requests than black applications.

BUT THEY REPORT CALLBACK RATES rather than the pure number of requests. I can't tell what the basic summary numbers are. I can't tell how they went from number of call backs to rate. Their percentages don't add up to 100.

research idea on diversity
- The phenomenon above is going on: blacks are receiving fewer callbacks. Yet at elite institutions we know they are dying for minority applicants. We know that blacks are getting many, many callbacks at elite institutions. 
- How can both be operating simultaneously?


other audit studies
Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004
- the original callback study: resumes with white names vs resumes with black names
- what is the actual percent of callbacks?
- 12% of applicants get a call if white
- 8% of applicants get a call if black
Oreopoulos, 2011
Gaddis, 2015


keywords
- woke
- diversity
- selection
- blacks receive fewer callbacks than whites


#diversity
#audit-study










# microscopic imaging

https://twitter.com/magnifiedpix

https://twitter.com/magnifiedpix/status/1421056970526580740/photo/1

What do things look like under a microscope? We need something like this in psychology or ob. Creating images of human behavior. 













# Park, Schmidt, & DeShon "A process model of goal orientation"

Motivation study about feedback, multiple que learning, and performance

keywords
- THESIS
- study to mimic
- multiple cue
- undergraduate research
- undergraduate reading
- graduate student mimic


#grad-reading
#mimic-thesis
#feedback
#motivation








# Wan, Xu, Hunt "Stay home or not? Modeling individuals' decisions during the covid pandemic"

keywords
- mathematical modeling
- decision analysis
- big equations with no justification












# Social class quote


"to illustrate this socioeconomic group theory in practice, imagine a discussion at three different family dinner tables. In each, a recently discharged veteran has declared that she is interested in developing her career in the fashion industry and wants advice on how to get started."

"The working-class parents might say, 'Well if you want to work in fashion, you are going to have to get good at sweing and sketching. How are you going to learn how to do that?'

"The middle-class family might say, 'To succeed in a fashion career, you might think about using your GI Bill to attend the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York or at least get into a good training program at Brooks Brothers or Macy's.'

"In the upper-middle-class family, the veteran might hear, 'You know our neighbor is vice president of merchandising at Neiman Marcus. You need to ask him out for coffee and see what he suggests.'

keywords
- social class
- ses
- socioeconomic status
- getting ahead
- poverty




#anti-woke
#ses
#poverty
#career
#sjw








# book idea, anne making decisions

In experiential learning, we notice bad luck but overlook dumb luck

Anne book on decisions
Denrell experiential learning





# book idea, charles murray: facing reality

Although large cities claim diversity, it is the people of small towns who are the most likely to interact with people from different backgrounds. In big cities,  people segregate. In small cities, there is only one school to attend. People in large vs small cities occupy different worlds. 

Most of the people in the US live in small towns











# Anderson & Lewis, "A dynamic model of individual and collective learning amid disruption"

This paper demonstrates the "abstract model" concept
- their model is simple
- the causal links between each variable in the model represnt a zillion different effects
- in text, they describe a million different processes and causal effects, effects that are no where represented in teh actual model

Rambling introduction with tangents everywhere. 

A paper about the relationship between individual learning, collective learning, and disruptive events. And somehow transactive memory systems will be included as well. They use systems dynamics modeling because doing so allows them to
- model complex interactive processes simultaneously
- extend the time horizon
- more clearly define complex theoretical propositions

## Their first model:

A reinforcing loop of learning
- BUT IT ISN'T REINFORCEMENT LEARNING

- a causal loops diagram of individual and collective learning

Complete task =+ individual learning
Complete task =+ collective learning

individual learning =+ individual knowledge
collective learning =+ collective knowledge

individual knowldge =+ individual capacity to complete tasks
collective knowlege =+ collective capacity to complete tasks

capacity =+ complete task

So, their core model suggests that learning explodes. They cite a lot of literature on power curves of learning, and on learning curves generally. Learning curves show plateuas...they don't show explosions...

The explosive loops are held in check by individual and collective forgetting. 


## second model

Now incorporate that idea that collective learning influences individual learning, and individual learning influences collective learning. 

They use transactive memory theory to justify why collective knowledge influences individual learning. Collective knowledge of who knows what influences individual learning by determining what each member decides to personally learn -- specifically, to learn in an area other than that already associated with another member.

[christopher note]. But as described, collective knowledge is not collective knowledge. In the immediately prior paragraph, collective knowledge means "christopher's knowledge of the collective," not "collective knowledge." Collective knowledge is an aggregate property. My understanding of who knows what is a piece of information in my individual head. 

They use "specialized language makes it difficult to talk to others" to justify the link between individual learning and collective knowledge. If an individual learns a lot (and becomes overspecialized), then it reduces his ability to contribute to the collective. 


## incorproate a few additional ideas

Doing so will resolve some of the conflicting empirical evidence about the efficacy of learning from experience in organizations. 


Disruptions change the fit between org or individual knowledge and the environment
- turnover (harms collective knowledge, not individual)
- technological change (harms individual knowledge, not collective)
- extreme events (harms both)


## translate verbal theory into math

Inevitably reduces the richness of the theory, the counterveiling benefit is that it creates a virtual laboratory in which subtle or nonintuitive implications of the theory's underlying assumptions can be exposed through numerical analysis. 

They write equations. I would just use a SF numerical simulation. 

## simulation

1. validate the outcomes explicated in TMS theory

If TMS theory is valid (and if our model is a valid representation of the theory), our simulations should show a benefit of specialization for producitivy and task completion. 

2. what happens when we add disruptions?

These are "punch the system" graphs



## summary

computational validation of TMS theory

Demonstrate that collective knowledge can produce greater individual learning, which may lead to overspecialization and ultimately reduce performance growth. This idea has not yet been empirically investigated. 

Disruptions that hamper collective knowledge are always bad.

Disruptions that hamper individual knowledge have negative short term effects on productivity but are good in the long term. These ideas also haven't been empirically tested. 

The model highlights that organizational learning and forgetting are dynamic processes that result from the complex interactions between individuals and collectives. It is cognitively challenging, costly, or impossible to consider simultaneously all of the factors that drive the dynamic character of learning in traditional laboratory experiments or field research, and it is impossible to trace the unfolding effects of microlevel learning processes by examining only archival data, even if those data are longitudinal. However, the simulation model in this paper can indeed account for the direct, interactive, and dynamic effects of these factors on learning, forgetting, and performance amid disruption. 




keywords
- org learning
- bad writing
- abstract academic jargon
- great intro fluff: how to get published by writing fluff with no substance



#academese
#bad-writing
#systems-dynamics
#organizational-learning
#transactive-memory






# Rogers, "The artful dodger: Answering the wrong questions the right way"

Speakers who dodged a question suffered no ill will from their listeners and paid no price.

People prefer, trust, and like a question-dodger who is smooth and sounds confident over a question-answerer who is unsmooth and stammers.

Speakers are better off answering smoothly in a way that is irrelevant toward the question than answering the question unsmoothly. 

A GOOD EXAMPLE OF WHAT IS WRONG WITH ACADEMIA
- only run research that can be turned into bite sized chunks
- I'm going to measure trust in this person so that I can get a text that says, "People trust these kinds of individuals"


keywords
- interviewing
- talking
- social psych
- undergraduate studies
- undergraduate reading



#interviews
#undergrad-reading
#negotiation
#dodging-questions
#academese










# how to fix the replication crisis and other crap in academia

We need to return to the idea of a "gauntlet" in academia. Critique. Criticism. Alternative explanations. Why something could be false. What evidence would prove something wrong.

We need gauntlet careers. People who have entire careers, their whole job is to do one thing: critique current ideas and test them rigorously. No new theory. No elaborate verbage. Show why something is wrong. 


keywords
- Christopher thinking



#christopher-thinking








# youtube comment about wokeness

I went to San Francisco State University for my Junior year of undergrad. Culture shock hit my parents and I just minutes into my orientation, when we were confused as to why each person was saying he/him, she/her, they/them, and other combinations of he/they and she/they, after introducing themselves by name. I had lived my whole life in Orange County, CA and went to a Christian school for 12 years, so as you can imagine I was surprised when I was obligated to create a name tag with my gender pronouns on them, which we were to display on our desks in nearly every class. Intro to Transgender Studies was a mandatory class for all Sociology majors, my mandatory writing class was based on Islamophobia since 9/11, and I knew if I shared any difference of opinion, my grades would likely suffer. So I just took it as an opportunity to be more observant than interactive, and I witnessed a culture of self-loathing, blaming others for their own issues/ consequences of own decisions, and intolerance due to thinking their opinions are ultimately objective because they are derived from "empathy" and inclusivity. I was open to learning about this new avenue I had not been down before, but shaming someone for not knowing about pronouns is equally as inconsiderate as rejecting to identify someone the way that they wish.


#anti-woke
#sjw





# physicist guy who builds cars in california



Science reveals how things work. It is not to be used for "science says X, so we should do X." Requiring courses of action is a political move.

If we want to preserve the integrity of science, we have to get people to stop using science as a claim of authority for how to proceed.

Small business owners do not want to lock down.
People who work in white collar jobs who can zoom into work don't care if we lock down.
These two groups have different interests. 
In deciding lockdowns, you want to make these differences explicit rather than simply saying "follow the science."
If the science is epidemiologists, they will give you a clear consensus: keeping people isolated will slow the spread of the virus. The science is clear. 
But in our policy, we have to decide among interests. We need to not hide interests but articulate them. 

If the science is economists, then the science is clear in a different direction: forcing people not to run their business will cause them to lose money. 


keywords
- philosphy of science
- interventions


#phil-of-science







# minimum wage


Minimum Wage:

Leftest: we should raise minimum wage because poor people deserve better wages.


Problem 1: it increases unemployment

Imagine you own a car. Tomorrow, gas prices increase to $30 a gallon. You are going to do everything you can not to drive, maybe even get rid of your car.

When you raise the minimum wage, employers get rid of low wage jobs. The people at the bottom are hurt by this policy.


Problem 2: it targets the wrong community

The vast majority of poor families have no one in their family working. 

The vast majority of individuals working low wage jobs are youngsters in well-off families. 

When you raise the minimum wage, you do nothing to help the poor families with no workers. 


A better solution:

Income credit.

For poor families (not low wages, target families, not wage jobs), an individual receives an additional $10k from the government if she finds a way to earn $15k herself. 

You are incentivizing employment. 



keywords
- economics
- minimum wage


#economics
#minimum-wage
#anti-woke






# tim dillon on satisfying work

You were meant to do job X. Who cares if you enjoy it. It's what you are good at. Who cares if you enjoy it. 



Tim Dillon on therapy: you can waste a lot of time trying to get to the bottom of everything. It makes you self-indulgent. Some people don't move forward becuase they think they have to keep plumming. Just accept that life is a cosmic joke. Why do we do self-care? Imagine visiting this country and thinking, "well I think what this country needs is for people to pay more attention to themselves." Often what that becoming yourself stuff turns into a just someone wanting to take more baths. We have to get away from me and self-care. 


Get out of your own way. 


My life is none of my business. Do the things you think are right. Have principles. Work hard. What happens I cannot control. 

If I try to manage and control everything in my life, that is how resentments build because things are not exactly as I want them to be. That will lead me to constantly saying, "well how do I fix this and that and that and that?" The better thought is, I don't know where this is going to go. But I'll hold onto my integrity and move forward.


keywords
- christopher thinking
- satisfaction at work


#tim-dillon
#christopher-thinking
#satisfaction






# loury on issues with universities

Issues with University:

(1) standards have gone down and grade inflation


(2) universities are now viewed as moral vehicles

Faculty and administrators and students have perceived certainties about moral issues, and they then feel that they need to signal, express, show solidarity with through the work of the university -- through its research, its teaching, its pedagogy, its composition, how it selects, what it defines to be excellence.

And when people don't agree, youngsters signal their moral posture with smugness and arrogance and self-righteousness. That smugness infects the university. We have a country of 300 million. When moral beliefs change, it is going to take a long time for those beliefs to work their way through the population...assuming that those beliefs are even correct to begin with. And, people are not terrible human beings for not being up to date on whatever agenda you care about. 



WHEN YOU TRANSFORM MORAL JUDGMENTS OVER NIGHT (THAT IS, WITHIN A HALF CENTURY), JUDGMENTS ABOUT GENDER IDENTITY FOR EXAMPLE, IN A COUNTRY OF 300 MILLION, EVERYBODY ISN'T GOING TO BE ON THE SAME PAGE AT THE SAME TIME. 



keywords
- wokeness
- woke

#anti-woke
#glenn-loury
#what-is-wrong-with-academia





# engineers and economists prize efficiency, but nature favors resilience

https://theconversation.com/engineers-and-economists-prize-efficiency-but-nature-favors-resilience-lessons-from-texas-covid-19-and-the-737-max-152670



There is a trade-off between efficiency and resilience. Efficiency requires optimal adaptation to an existing environment, while resilience is an ability to adapt to large or sudden changes in the environment. Society’s emphasis on short-term gains has long tipped the balance in favor of efficiency.




economic systems are very unlikely ever to be in an equilibrium, because the underlying variables – such as prices, supply and demand – are very likely to change while the systems are making their slow way toward convergence. In other words, economic equilibrium, a central concept in economic theory, is a mythical rather than a real phenomenon.



keywords
- lag time of effects
- resilience
- efficiency
- economics



#efficiency-vs-resilience
#economics









# cancel culture and free speech are compatible


https://enfascination.com/weblog/post/2423




Dialogue-first spaces exist when there is physical security and everyone can assume the good faith of everyone else. These get you the familiar ideal of older liberals: unity is a goal, good intentions behind a bad action matter, civility matters, there are no bad ideas, you attack the idea not the person, speech is free but yelling doesn’t work, content trumps style, you can discuss abhorrent ideas, defend people with abhorrent views, due process is respected by all, and reason prevails.


Politics-first spaces are wild: none of the above is true. You don’t assume good intentions of others who have wronged you, you can attack people rather than ideas, vulnerability can be weakness, interest in other cultures is appropriation, race and other identity differences are recognized and even emphasized, affiliation and trust are based on those identities, the legitimacy of your input depends on them, mobbing is legitimate, a witchhunt is a tactic, silence is assent, self-censorship is tact, shutting someone down is fair game, how you come off is as important as how you are, and the weak are strong en masse.


The only truly dialogue-first spaces are those that maintain consensus from all participants all the time. If one person’s experience is that they don’t believe others are acting in good faith, it’s literally not a dialogue space anymore, no matter how many other people still believe. That sounds like an overstatement, but the proof is easy. Say someone in a dialogue-first space speaks up after covert discrimination or harassment. Do you take their claim seriously or not? If you take them seriously, then you’re acknowledging that bad faith is happening somewhere. And if you don’t, then you’re rejecting their experience out of hand, in bad faith, and the person who just broke the space is you. No matter what you do, you’ll help them break consensus.

Since anyone can call bullshit at any time, true dialogue-first spaces are fragile. Dialogue-first spaces are little islands surrounded by the political spaces




keywords
- open dialogue and free speech communities are fragile
- free speech
- woke


#anti-woke
#sjw
#free-speech




# aplying iq to iq

https://razib.substack.com/p/applying-iq-to-iq



The implication that test measurement does not correlate with other aspects of performance is manifestly false. Those with higher measured IQs have higher incomes, greater educational attainment, and lower crime rates (this remains true among siblings who differ in IQ). This is well known within psychological science, but for various reasons has been obscured and downplayed by broader American culture.


The coronavirus pandemic has now presented some opportunities to remove testing from American life. One of the major-specific reasons cited is long-term racial discrepancies in average score. The more general objection is that standardized testing favors the privileged due to the cost of the tests, as well as the reality that those from higher socioeconomic backgrounds tend to be more well prepared to take these tests. This is almost certainly true on some level, though the success of the children of poor Bangladeshi immigrants in New York City shows the meritocratic path that testing can provide.

Tests are imperfect. But what is the alternative? Over the past few years graduate schools have been removing the GRE as a requirement for admission. What will the consequence be? If the history of China is any guide, those with connections and pedigree will benefit. Without a hard-to-fake entrance exam, recommendations from those you trust will loom large again. The abolition of the GRE will be a back door through which the “letter of introduction” returns. Who will be hurt by this? Who will benefit? There are many answers here, but one thing seems obvious: those without connections will suffer. International students. Those from working-class backgrounds. Non-traditional older students trying to turn their life around with the benefit of hindsight. When academics rely on networks of those they already know, the circle of inclusion will begin to narrow. Ironically, attempts to “foster inclusion” by removing standardized testing will inevitably constrict the space of those included.



#intelligence
#sat-act






# Sawhill & Venator, "Is there a shortage of marriageable men?"

People tend to marry people of the same income, beliefs, race, and background.

keywords
- assortative mating


#assortive-mating













# Kurzban & Houser, "Experiments investigating cooperative types in humans"

We find that our subjects fall into three types: reciprocal types, who contribute to the public good as a positive function of their beliefs about others' contributions, constitute the majority (63%). Others are classified as free riders, others defectors, and a few as unclassifiable. 


It is interesting to note that social psychologists and economists
have postulated similar classification systems. The research tradition in social psychology on social value orientation, for example,
suggests that people can be classified as competitors (motivated to
achieve better payoffs than others), cooperators (motivated to try
to increase group welfare), and individualists (motivated to serve
their own interests) (31). This set of types nicely parallels work in
experimental economics that suggests that people fall into types
who are ‘‘spiteful’’ (competitive) (32), ‘‘payoff-maximizing’’ (individualists), and ‘‘altruistic’’ (cooperators) (33).

keywords
- economic game theory
- cooperation
- individual differences
- citizenship behaviors
- add to anita study, prior economic game, does this cooperative score predict team processes?



#cooperation
#ocbs
#individual-differences








# Argote, Lee, Park, 2021 "Organizational learning processes and outcomes: major findings"

As orgs acquire experience, their performance typically improves at a decreasing rate (learning curve). 

Psychologists discovered learning curves: the more individuals practiced a task, the less time they took and fewer errors they made (Thorndike, 1898; Thurstone, 1919; Ebbinghaus, 1964). Shapira (2020) provides an overview of research on individual learning from these early studies to the current day. 

Bandura (1971) argues that most learning occurs through exposure to social models -- examples of other individuals (not reinforcement through environment). As Bandura (1971) notes, relying on differential reinforcement of trail-and-error is not feasible in areas in which mistakes are costly and/or tasks are complex. Social learning can occur through observation of others performing the task or through instruction. 

Org learning is more than the aggregate of individual learning curves. Individuals get better at performing their particular task as they gain experience. As team members gain experience working together, they learn to coordinate their interdependent activities. As the hospital performs more procedures, the time to perform each procedure decreases (Reagans et al., 2005). Write (1936) published one of the first org learning papers: the amount of labor required to produce an aircraft decreases at a decreasing rate. 

Typically, people and orgs regard experience as a success if the performance is higher than the org's aspiration levels and a failure otherwise (Greve & Gaba 2020). 


Does knowledge gained from a learning curve sustained itself? Obviously, orgs can decreciate in their knowledge, and individuals can forget. Individual forgetting can contribute to depreciation at the org level, but org level depreciation is also affected by turnover. 


keywords
- strategy learning
- organizational learning


#strategy
#organizational-learning






# Oswald, Converse, Putka (2014)

Psychometrics simulation people don't account for multi level nature of data when simulating. This leads to spurious relationships.


blackca <- rnorm(500, 0, 20)
whiteca <- rnorm(1000, 45, 20)

blackp <- blackca*0.30 + rnorm(500, 0, 1)
whitep <- whiteca*0.30 + rnorm(1000, 0, 1)

popdf <- data.frame(
  "per" = c(blackp, whitep),
  'ca' = c(blackca, whiteca)
)

summary(lm(per ~ ca, data = popdf))




x1 <- rnorm(1000, 0, 2)
x2 <- rnorm(1000, 0, 2)

x2 <- 0.3*x1 + (sqrt(1 - (0.3^2)) * x2)

whitesca <- x1[800]
whitesca <- whitesca + 0.45

blacksca <- x1[801:1000]

whitesp <- x2[800]
whitesp <- whitesp + 1

blacksp <- x2[801:1000]

hm <- data.frame(
  'p' = c(whitesp, blacksp),
  'c' = c(whitesca, blacksca)
)

summary(lm(p ~ c, data = hm))



keywords
- psychometrics
- within between

#psychometrics
#selection-simulation




# Gary, Yang, Yetton "Stretch goals and the distribution of org performance"

Many academics, consultants and managers advocate stretch goals to attain superior organizational performance. However, existing theory speculates that, although stretch goals may benefit some organizations, they are not a ‘rule for riches’ for all organizations. To address this speculation, we use two experimental studies to explore the effects on the mean, median, variance, and skewness of performance of stretch compared with moderate goals. Participants were assigned moderate or stretch goals to manage a widely used business simulation. Compared with moderate goals, stretch goals improve performance for a few participants, but many abandon the stretch goals in favor of lower self-set goals, or adopt a survival goal when faced with the threat of bankruptcy. Consequently, stretch goals generate higher performance variance across organizations and a right-skewed performance distribution. Contrary to conventional wisdom, we find no positive stretch goal main effect on performance.


keywords
- motivation
- undergraduate reading
- copy study
- graduate thesis
- good research method to mimic


#stretch-goals
#motivation
#self-regulation
#grad-reading
#undergrad-reading
#mimic-thesis








# Hu & Bettis, 2018, "Multiple organizational goals with feedback from shared technological task environments"

How does feedback for one goal affect allocation toward other goals?

Study automanufacturing plants that have three goals
- efficiency
- safety
- reliability

They quantify those goals by looking at yearly consumer reports. 

Run autoregressive VAR modeling

The variables are related. If efficiency is low at t-1, then safety is high at t.

GOOD EXAMPLE OF STUDYING SOMETHING THAT IS REALLY ABSTRACT IN ITS OPERATIONALIZATION. They were interested in studying goal tradeoffs, but what they really studied were consumer report relationships. They talk a lot about actions directed toward goals, but they only measure the consumer reports. 


keywords
- vector autoregressive modeling
- motivation
- multiple goal self regulation 


#goals
#motivation
#self-regulation
#strategy









# Andersson et al., 2013 "Deciding for others reduces loss aversion"

How do people make risky decisions for others? In gain situations, people take the same risks for others as for themselves. In loss situations, decisions on behalf of others are more risky. 

See also:

Pahlke, J., Strasser, S., & Vieider, F. M. (2015). Responsibility effects in decision making under risk. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 51(2), 125-146.

Vieider, F. M., Villegas‐Palacio, C., Martinsson, P., & Mejía, M. (2016). Risk taking for oneself and others: A structural model approach. Economic Inquiry, 54(2), 879-894.

Friedl, A., Pondorfer, A., & Schmidt, U. (2020). Gender differences in social risk taking. Journal of Economic Psychology, 77, 102182.

Montinari, N., & Rancan, M. (2018). Risk taking on behalf of others: The role of social distance. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 57(1), 81-109.

Polman, E., & Wu, K. (2020). Decision making for others involving risk: A review and meta-analysis. Journal of Economic Psychology, 77, 102184.


keywords
- risky decisions on behalf of others
- decision making
- leadership


#leadership
#decision-making
#risky-decisions





# Burris, Detert, "Speaking up vs being heard"

When an employee and her supervisor agree that voice was appropriate and useful, the manager rates the employee as higher performing. 


keywords
- manager ratings
- voice
- ocbs


#ocbs
#voice







# Cassar, "Job mission as a substitute for monetary"

You can increase effort not only by connecting it to performance but also through prosocial missions.

If someone's effort on a task generates a donation to a charity, people offer more effort than when no such donation is created.

keywords
- prosocial incentives
- motivation
- behavioral economics
- self regulation
- experiments


#motivation
#self-regulation
#incentives
#prosocial-missions
#effort
#psych-of-performance









# Chen "A dynamic model of rational addiction"

E-cigarettes contain less nicotine, but people are starting to realize addiction builds where they start needing more and more, leading to cigarette use.






# Fisher "Intertemporal choices"

Whether to act now or delay gratification is influenced by the attributes that you focus on.

Consider an individual who plans to purchase a new fashionable outfit: purchase today or wait for the outfit to go on sale next month? If he focused on the amount of money she has to spend, she would prefer to spend less money and thus delay. If she focused on when she would be able to wear the outfit, she would prefer to have the outfit sooner rather than later. 

keywords
- attributions
- decisions


#intertemporal-choice
#discounting






# Gilchrist et al., "When 3+1 > 4: gift structure"

Do higher wages lead to increased productivity? We find that paying higher wages, per se, does not have a discernable effect on productivity.

Economists have long recognized that employees are often paid more than the market clearing wage, and that unemployed workers do not bid wages down to the point where supply equals demand. The neoclassical explanation for this phenomenon comes in the form of efficiency wage theories, which generally argue that employees will work harder when they receive high wages because they do not want to lose a high-paying job (Katz 1986). This type of mechanism relies on repeated interactions between employers and employees. In one-time jobs without any consideration for future employment, the neoclassical model would argue that efficiency wages do not increase productivity. At the same time, a robust literature based in psychology and behavioral economics demonstrates that people care about fairness, and that fairness considerations may create incentives for reciprocation. If you give a gift to someone, that person might reciprocate – even in a one-shot game with no potential for future interaction (Gouldner, 1960; Cialdini, 1993; Berg et al. 1995, Fehr and Gächter 2000, Pillutla et al. 2003, Falk et al. 2008). This principle has been implemented in field settings as well. For example, Falk (2007) shows that including a small gift in a fundraising letter leads to higher donation levels. In the context of labor economics, fairness concerns and reciprocity have been offered as an explanation for efficiency wages (Akerlof 1982, Akerlof and Yellen 1990, Fehr et al. 2009). If employees view high wages as a gift, then they may reciprocate by working harder, even though there is no financial incentive to do so. The thrust of this argument is that the market wage serves as a reference point, and employees will reward positive deviations from this reference point—even in a one-shot employment contract with no career concerns.

Do employees work harder when they are paid more? Laboratory experiments have mostly shown that paying an unconditional bonus before the work starts causes workers to reciprocate by working harder (e.g. Fehr et al. 1993, Fehr and Gächter 2000, Hannan et al. 2002, Charness 2004). In seminal work in the field, Gneezy and List (2006) look at two field settings, hiring roughly 40 workers to test whether paying higher-than marketwages increases output in a library data entry task and in door-to-door fundraising. Specifically, Gneezy and List compare the output of workers assigned to a “gift” treatment, (in which workers are hired at a low wage and then offered a raise immediately before starting work), with the output of workers assigned to a “non-gift” treatment, (in which workers are hired at and paid the low wage). They find that workers who receive the “gift” (i.e., the additional money) exert higher productivity for the first few hours of the task; in their setting, the temporary increase in productivity does not justify its cost. Since then, there has been mixed evidence on the relevance of gift exchange in different contexts. Hennig-Schmidt et al. (2010), Kube et al. (2012, 2013), Al-Ubaydli et al. (2015), and concurrent but independent work by Esteves-Sorenson and Macera (2013) all find that gifts have mild to no effects when hiring undergraduate students for field experiments. However, looking at a tree-planting firm, Bellemare and Shearer (2009) find that a one-day, unexpected gift leads to an increase in productivity. Cohn et al. (forthcoming) also find evidence in favor of gift exchange—but only when employees view the initial wage as being unfairly low. Looking at managers in a large multinational, Ockenfels et al. (forthcoming) find that bonuses that fall behind natural reference points lead to lower job satisfaction and performance. There is an open question about the extent to which all of these effects persist. However, because this prior research has not varied the base wage, the set-up cannot identify whether reciprocity is triggered because the higher wages are above the market rate or because the higher wages are salient to workers who unexpectedly receive the gift after having already agreed to a job. In other words, wage amount (high vs. low) is confounded with wage structure (salient gift vs. no gift) in the prior literature. In this paper, we offer a large-scale gift exchange experiment in a field setting where we vary both whether or not a worker receives an unexpected raise before starting work, as well as the base wage offered to potential hires. This subtle difference allows us to differentiate between the impact of salient “gifts” on performance and the impact of above-market wages on performance. Our results show that the way in which a wage is structured (and not simply its level) may be essential to generating reciprocity. In our study, hiring at and paying workers a high wage ($4) leads to no increase in productivity; i.e. it results in an economically identical and statistically indistinguishable amount of productivity relative to hiring at and paying workers a lower wage ($3). However, hiring workers at a lower wage and then offering them an unexpected raise ($3+$1) significantly increases performance. Common models of reciprocity in labor markets (e.g., Akerlof 1982, Akerlof and Yellen 1990) assume that high wages alone are the determinant of reciprocation, but these models do not differentiate between our 3+1 and 4 offers.


keywords
- incentives
- behavioral economics
- reciprocity
- wages
- effort
- performance



#incentives
#pay-for-performance
#performance-management
#economics
#reciprocity
#psych-of-performance






# Heckman "Detecting Discrimination"

A critique of the studies that do "send applications to 1000 companies; the only difference in applications is their white vs black name; blacks receive fewer requests for interviews."

This method can find discrimination when none exists. 

The issue
- the SD of the unmeasured variables that correlate with each group are not equivalent

Another issue
- discrimination that takes place in the market is different from what people are measuring, though they muddy the two

"Labor market discrimination is no longer a first-order quantitative problem in American society. At this time, the goal of achieving black economic progress is better served by policies that promote skill formation, like improving family environments, schools and neighborhoods, not be strengthening the content and enforcement of civil rights laws -- the solution to the problem of an earlier era."



The market issue:

The impact of market discrimination is not determined by the most discriminatory participants in the market, or even by the average level of discrimination among firms, but rather by the level of discrimination at the firms where ethnic minorities actually end up buying, working, and borrowing.

So, if I send 1000 applications to many different companies...how many of those companies are locations where black women actually apply for jobs? There could be no discrimination among the firms where black people actually apply. Or, there could be lots of discrimination where black people actually apply. This information is not included in a 'send out the applications' study.

A well-designed audit study could uncover many individual firms that discriminate, while at the same time the marginal effect of discrimination on the wages of employed workers could be zero.

There may be evil lurking in the hearts of firms that is never manifest in consummated market transactions.



The SD issue:

It is unlikely that all characteristics that might affect productivity will be perfectly matched. The implicit assumption that justifies this method is that the effect of the unobserved characteristics averages out to zero across firms for the same pair described in the vignette. 

Making one set of variables more alike for an audit pair may also make the bias in estimating discrimination worse if the distributions of unobserved characteristics are not the same across race/gender groups even if the means are.


Another way to state this point is to think of pairing up black and white high jumpers to see if they can clear a bar set at a certain height. There is no discrimination, in the sense that they both use the same equipment and have the bar set at the same level. Suppose now that the chance of a jumper (of any race) clearing the bar depends on two additive factors: the person’s height and their jumping technique. We can pair up black and white jumpers so that they have identical heights, but we can’t directly observe their technique. Let us make the generous assumption, implicit in the entire audit literature, that the mean jumping technique is equal for the two groups. Then, if the variance of technique is also the same for white and black high-jumpers, we would find that the two racial groups are equally likely to clear the bar. On the other hand, if the variance differs, then whether the black or white pair is more likely to clear the bar will depend on how the bar is set, relative to their common height, and which racial group has a higher variance in jumping technique.



keywords
- discrimination
- vignette studies
- selection

#detecting-discrimination







# Lee, Doyle "How performance incentives shape exploration/exploitation"

Can individuals excel simultaneously at exploration and exploitation? How? How do incentives change which dimension people pursue?

Examine employees who undergo a pay restructuring. They go from a performance-based incentive system to a flat-wage structure. What happens?

When wages change from performance-based to flat wages, then high-ability individuals increase their exploratory behavior...they presume this effect happens because such individuals have greater slack available in a flat-wage structure with minimum performance targets. 

In other words, the high ability performers have no problem reaching the minimal requirements in a flat-wage structure, so they reach the requirements, have extra time/space, and then pursue exploratory ideas.

An unanswered question: why do they do so? What perceptions mediate this move? Is it because the high performers are bored? Because they have greater cognitive capacity?


keywords
- incentives
- pay
- exploration exploitation



#incentives
#exploration-exploitation
#performance-management









# jd hudge fund story about profit tailoring [james]

Old EA video games: you pay 40 for a game. Regardless of whether I spend 4 or 400 hours playing the game, we all pay the same price.

The person who wants to play it for 400 might be willing to pay more for his experience.

So, develop in-app or in-game purchases. If you want more of the experience, pay for it and you get it. If you don't like it, then don't pay for it. 



#performance-management
#incentives
#in-app-purchases
#engagement









# Miller, Washburn, Glick, 2013

Most studies are internally consistent in how they define, explain, and then study firm performance. Typically, people theorize a multidimensional performance construct but then only study two dimensions. 

Some view performance as a multidimensional, latent construct, others view it as a loosely related set of constructs, others view it as an aggregate. 















# Boudreau, Guinan, Lakhani, Riedl, 2016 "Looking across and looking beyond the knowledge frontier"

The "intellectual distance" between the knowledge embodied in a new proposal and the knowledge within a reviewers head relates to the reviewer's ratings. 

Reviewers systematically give lower scores to proposals that are closer to their own areas of expertise. 

Why?

Decision under uncertainty principle
- the evaluation is the reviewer trying to discern noise from true quality. Greater intellectual distance (less expertise, greater ignorance) would lead to less precise evaluations but no differences in mean evaluations.

Bounded rationality perspective
- experts more readily discern demerits, problems, and limitations
- experts are also more likely to misconstrue novel work



keywords
- novelty
- research proposals
- exploration
- reviewers suck
- cognitive psychology



#phil-of-science
#nsf
#exploration-exploitation
#reviewers-suck












# Gavetti et al., "neo-carnegie:"


Soem writing on the important work of Simon, March, and the carnegie school of thought. 

Organizations are systems of coordinated action among individuals and groups whose preferences, information, interests, or knoweldge differ. 

One pillar of the carnegie school is the view that organizations bring together a set of participants with conflicting interests, goals, and knowledge to cooperate in collective action. Cooperation among conflicting partieis is a key achievement of organizations, rather than an underlying assumption of individual or collective behavior. 

A basic model for achieving cooperation is the inducement-contribution model (Barnard, 1938; Simon, 1947; March & Simon, 1958). Members agree to participate so long as the perceived value of the inducements they receive from the org exceeds the perceived opportunity costs of their contributions. 



#cooperation
#strategy
#human-resource-management
#collective-action
#collective-performance












# Podsakoff et al., "what predicts within-person variance"

Decisions about what to study (construct type), how to study it (measurement and design characteristics), and from whom to obtain the data (sample characteristics) predict the proportion of variance attributle to within-person factors. 

keywords
- ESM
- within person
- between within
- dynamics











# Shamsollahi Zyphur et al., "Long-run effects in dynamic systems"

How to calculate long-run effects.

Class Econometric long-run effects:

What would happen if an increase in X were to be mainted over time? If you improved X by 1 unit and maintained it at each successive wave, Y would adjust to a new equilibrium that is AAA units higher compared to its initial levels.

You can also show that a one-time effect is unlikely to persist in the system over the long run, or that an intervention is unlikely to last. Harder to test for.


This gives me some language for "interventions"
- some effects are long-run: if you increase X and it stays up at each successive wave, what happens to Y?
- permanence of one-time intervention: if you intervene on X and make it higher at one moment, how long will that effect last in Y?


keywords
- dynamic systems
- cross lag panel modeling
- dynamic panel modeling











# Tucker et al., "Improving productivity through public relative performance feedback"

In emergency departments, when you change from private to public and relative performance feedback, phyisicians improve in their performance. They also find reductions in variation in productivity across providers, which stems from bottom-ranked workers exhibiting differentially large improvements in productivity. These effects hold without sacrificing system-level performance, service quality, or worker attrition.


keywords
- incentives
- feedback
- performance
- performance feedback
- big fish small pond

#frog-pond
#incentives
#feedback
#performance-management
#big-fish-small-fish












# Schulte et al., "The coevolution of network ties and perceptions of team psychological safety"

Which comes first—team social networks or emergent team states (e.g., team climate)? We argue that team members’ social network ties and team members’ climate perceptions coevolve over time as a function of six reciprocal and co-occurring processes. We test our conceptual framework in a 10-month longitudinal study of perceptions of team psychological safety and social network ties in 69 work teams and find considerable support for our hypotheses. Our main results suggest that perceptions of psychological safety predict network ties. The more psychologically safe team members perceive their team to be, the more likely they are to ask their teammates for advice and to see them as friends, and the less likely they are to report difficult relationships with them. At the same time, network ties predict psychological safety. Team members adopt their friends’ and advisors’ perceptions of the team’s psychological safety and reject the perceptions of those with whom they report a difficult relationship.

keywords
- team processes
- team states
- network ties
- network theory



#networks
#team-states
#climate
#team-processes












# social animal ideas

I CAN'T DECIDE WHETHER I LOVE OR HATE YOU
lack of going for it
lack of taking risks
bring up sexuality and touching
take a risk for a quick fail rather than a slow, gauranteed fail with boring talk

#social-animal















# Tiokhin et al., "Shifting the level of selection in science"

Criteria for rewarding scientists typically focus on individual contributions. This creates a conflict between what is best for scientists' careers and what is best for science. 

We need to shift the incentives to better align individual and collective interests. 

In evolutionary biology, it is well-established that mechanisms that create a shared fate incentivize individuals to confer benefits to others, reducing individual-level competition and promoting cooperation.

The case in hens:
- The goal is to increase chicken egg production
- A: selection for the most productive hens (those that lay the most eggs). These hens also are the nastiest. They canibalize their peers. When you select for the best hens, total egg production actually decreases.
- B: select for the most productive groups of hens. Group 3 produced a lot of eggs. Allow all of those hens to reproduce. This increases the number of eggs produced over successive generations.

What could be done in academia:
- reward at the department level
- offer permanent positions for roles other than producing research, rather to help others improve. Statisticians, technicians, theoretical modelerrs.
- create competitions that incentivize large-scale cooperation
- make it easier for individuals to police group-detrimental behaviors



THIS PAPER IS AMAZING


keywords
- cooperation
- theory of science
- selection
- evolutionary biology
- evolution of cooperation


#great-paper
#selection
#level-of-selection
#reward-group-vs-individual
#cooperation
#evolution-of-cooperation








 
# Neumark, "Detecting discrimination in audit"

A more detailed follow-up to Heckman's "detecting discrimination."

keywords
- economics
- diveristy
- discrimination
- selection
- vignette studies

#audit-studies
#detecting-discrimination








# Ward, Beal et al., "Diversity climate, trust: a multilevel dynamic system" Zyphur

A dynamic panel model but they also include between org predictors of the cross-lag relationships. 


keywords
- dynamic panel
- dynamics
- cross lag














# college adminissions based on race

Using racial characteristics in college admissions is a violation...some cases say yes, some cases say no

Colleges often use race in addition to using gpa, test scores, etc. 

https://www.oyez.org/cases/2002/02-516

https://www.reuters.com/article/harvard-admissions/u-s-court-upholds-harvard-race-based-admissions-supreme-court-appeal-expected-idUSKBN27S26G


keywords
- diversity
- selection
- college admissions
- quotas

#quotas
#college-admissions
#sat-act











# cancel culture

Peace Prize laureate Nadia Murad uninvited from school because her memoir about being captured and sexually enslaved by Islamic terrosists "would foster Islamophobia."

https://twitter.com/HillelNeuer/status/1462229609743892489

keywords
- cancel culture


#anti-woke
#sjw














# the main stream media sucks

https://andrewsullivan.substack.com/p/when-all-the-media-narratives-collapse-650

All of the things the mainstream media got wrong
- 2016 election
- rittenhouse
- covington
- russian collusion
- vaccines
- lab-leak theory
- jussie smollett


keywords
- media bias


#anti-woke
#sjw
#journalists-suck
#mainstream-media-lies












# children with iodine loss harms intellectual development

The intelligence damage of children exposed to severe ID was profound, demonstrated by a 12.45 IQ point loss. Iodine supplementation before and during pregnancy to women living in severe ID areas could prevent their children from intelligence deficit.

keywords
- intelligence
- cognitive development
- undergraduate reading


#intelligence








# army leadership

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gIAD4PQijv4


keywords
- leadership assessment
- army leadership
- how to improve leadership skills








# oddball interview questions don't work

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10869-021-09740-9

keywords
- selection
- assessment
- weird interview questions

#oddball-interview-qs-no-work











# too many executives

We need people who are creative to be allowed to be creative.

In movies, the check box used to be, "is this creative?" Now, it's "are there enough females? Do we crash a car? Is there the right emotional tone?"

We are algorithmic with everything, which has created bland output. Movies suck.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lMdaD1JpCFE

keywords
- the downside to algorithms
- too many executives

#too-many-mbas
#downside-to-algorithms

















# christopher thinking - dangerous people

the most dangerous people
- bored
- no purpose
- moderately intelligent
- highly educated


#christopher-thinking







# christopher thinking - theories of constructs vs math

The difference between theories of constructs and 


We don't need theories of delay
We don't need theories of paradox
These are mechanisms

Instead, we have theories about why certain patterns exist. 



#christopher-thinking









# undergraduate teaching statistics

Undergrads:

the youtube effect, the visibility effect

Negative police events are trending down, fast. But of course, every once in a while there is an uptik. If the news only films the uptiks, then it appears like negative police events are increasing. 




#undergrad-reading






# why are all of our institutions woke?

Becuase far-leftists care more, so they attend marches, cry, and do more politically savy things. Republicans stay out of things.

https://richardhanania.substack.com/p/why-is-everything-liberal

keywords
- woke
- political polarization


#anti-woke
#sjw






# why does the racial wealth gap persist?

Coleman Hughes

https://quillette.com/2018/07/19/black-american-culture-and-the-racial-wealth-gap/

Because of slavery:
- no

If it were due to slavery, then slave-holding states would be richer than non-slave holding states, which isn't true. 

If it were due to historical oppression, then Singapore would be a sham. Singapore was destroyed and colonized 3 different times during its history. It is now one of the most prosperous places in the world.

Because of racial policies in the 1960s
- no

Benevolence from the state is not a prerequisite for wealth accrual. We had laws against Japanese. We had laws against Irish. We had laws against Jews. They are all doing well.

Moreover, there are huge racial gaps among those of the same race.



What is the real answer? Spending patterns.
- more likely to purchase luxury items
- far less likely to save for the long-term
- far more likely to make bad savings decisions

Knowing how to build wealth must be taught. That is a cultural issue. 



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KxbIgVJXMuc


keywords
- racial wealth gap



#anti-woke
#sjw
#race-disparity









# College professor admissions everywhere are using diversity statements

https://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-mac-donald-diversity-ucla-20180902-story.html


https://freebeacon.com/campus/study-diversity-statements-required-for-one-fifth-of-academic-jobs/


8 in 10 academic jobs require a diversity statement
https://twitter.com/epkaufm/status/1458056792844419077

keywords
- woke
- diversity statements



#anti-woke
#sjw






# museum volunteers fired due to wokeness and diversity quotas

https://quillette.com/2021/11/15/the-unbearable-whiteness-of-museum-tour-guides/

keywords
- woke
- diversity
- political polarization




#anti-woke
#sjw





# pro-black diversity people are actually rude to black people

https://twitter.com/DelanoSquires/status/1460429769489666048


keywords
- woke
- diversity


#anti-woke
#sjw








# 60% of college students said they were reluctant to speak up for fear of offending other students

https://twitter.com/HdxAcademy/status/1367112525628768259

#anti-woke
#sjw
#free-speech








# christopher thinking

Seems like a good idea to measure lay beliefs and compare to known facts.

35 myths on intelligence.
How much feedback do people want? (montclair state professor)
HR managemenet myths (montclair state professor)
Team and self regulation measure (DeShon Sinem lab)

Do the same thing for beliefs about interventions. If the within person relationship is 0.3, what will happen if I manipulate X by this amount?


#christopher-thinking











# Boroomand & Smaldino, "Hard work, risk-taking, and diversity in a model of collective problem solving"

Problem-sovling is necessary for organizational effectiveness, and teams often have a greater capacity to search and discover solutions to problems relative to individuals. What characteristics enhance a collective's ability to problem solve?

Complexity of problem
Agent characteristics
- hard working
- risk taking
Team characteristics
- diversity
- size

## model

Rugged landscape problem space. Agents located on a network.

I start with a "solution," or a value on the rugged landscape. 
Do any of my neighbors have a better solution?
Meaning a better mental position on the landscape?

Yes? Adopt their solution.

No? Search
- if I find a better solution, adopt it
- if not, keep current solution

Repeat across the agents.

Repeat for t periods.

Collective performance is the mean score of the team.

Hardworking
- search more than once in a single iteration

Risk taking
- search with greater "randomness"

Team diversity
- agents start at vastly different parts of the problem space



## results

The effect with the largest magnitude was changing the nature of the problem. Going from a simple problem to a complex problem causes team performance to plummet and to take longer.

Hardworking is useful if the problem is simple and you need it done quickly.

Risk taking is useful if delay is fine and you want to reach superior performance.



keywords
- agent based model
- leadership like model
- bryan acton like model
- leadership quarterly compare
- good example of what these collective problem solving simulations tend to find
- collective decision making
- collective performance
- problem solving



#agent-based-model
#collective-action
#collective-performance
















# Mertens et al., "how much feedback do employees need?"

Employees reported ~ 4 feedback conversations in 3 weeks. Contrary to earlier suggestions that there might be an optimal feedback frequency, we find support for the notion that more feedback is better, without any indication of a downward trend at the highest feedback frequency.


keywords
- feedback
- undergraduate reading
- graduate philosophy
- graduate study
- graduate thesis
- lay beliefs


#feedback
#lay-beliefs
#performance-management











# Fisher et al., "Selection myths: a conceptual replication of HR Professionals beliefs"

HR practitioners tended to be worse at identifying personnel selection myths than was shown by Rynes et al over 15 years ago.

Myths:

(all of these are false)

Although people use many different terms to describe personalities, there are really only four basic dimensions of personality, as captured by the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.

Conscientiousness is a better predictor of overall job performance than general mental ability/IQ.

Companies that screen job applicants for values have higher overall job performance than those that screen for general mental ability/IQ.

Integrity tests don't work well in practice because so many people lie on them.

The most valid employment interviews are designed around an applicant's unique background.

Being very intelligent is actually a disadvantage for performing well on a low-skilled job.

There is very little difference among personality inventories in terms of how well they predict an applicant's overall job performance.

Emotional intelligence is a better predictor of overall job performance than general mental ability/IQ.

A skilled graphologist (i.e., handwriting analysis expert) can be helpful in predicting overall job performance.

keywords
- montclair state professor
- lay beliefs
- selection
- job analysis




#selection-myths
#lay-beliefs
#interviews
#selection
#psychometrics
#performance-management







# grand, braun, kuljanin, koz 2016 "The dynamics of team cognition...a process-oriented"

Team cognition (shared mental models & transactive memory) relates to team performance
Distribution of expertise and specialization among members relates to knowledge building and decision making

how and why does team cognition develop?
what are the dynamic processes through which knowledge is acquired, compiles, and manifests at the team level

You must separete the processes of emergence from the static outcome variable. 

what are the process mechanisms specified by grand?

Data selection
- Direct attention toward info that is available in their task environment

Encode
- internalize some info into privately held knowledge

Integrate
- associate info that was encoded

Member selection
- team elects someone to communicate

Retrieval
- person who is going to speak retrieves a piece of internalized info

Share
- take internalized info and communicate outward

Data select
- prompts attention from receivers

Decode
- other members try to internalize what was said

Acknowledge
- the receiving members state that they have internalized

The result is emergence of externalized knowlege held collectively across multiple team members



How is this different from my "managers may not be to blame?"
- they brag
- they justify use of computational modeling



keywords
- emergence
- teams
- computational modeling


#team-states
#team-processes
#agent-based-modeling








# ashford "reflections on the looking glass"

  

The feedback literature is too focused on performance appraisals that happen once per year.

  

How do employees seek and use feedback in their everyday lives?

  
  

## five often-addressed questions about feedback-seeking

  

How often do individuals seek it?

  

What method do people use to seek feedback?

  

Timing of feedback seeking

  

Target of feedback seeking

  

Topic of feedback seeking (success or failures, or certain dimensions of performance)

  

[they don't provide clear answers to these questions]

  

## motives for feedback-seeking

  

Instrumental people

- seek feedback because it has informational value that helps you meet a goal

  

Ego defense

- feedback can hurt performers' pride




#performance-management
#feedback











# Thurgood, Henderson, 2020: Perception is reality 

  

CEO personality correlates with stock fluctuations of the firm. They argue cause. 

  

Keywords

#Unfounded-conclusions

#Research-discoveries

#Strategy

#Informed-strategy-paper

#amj-reading

  

# Grijalva, Timothy D Maynes: Examining the I in team.   

  

Narcissism is not related to team performance, but prior work ignored composition. Team mean and maximum narcissism relates to team coordination and performance (nba), especially when the narcissists have central roles. 

  

Keywords

#aggregating-function

#team-performance

#amj-reading



  

# Brennecke: difficult ties  

  

People maintain connections with difficult colleagues when they know the colleagues will be instrumental in building their network. 

keywords
#amj-reading
#networks

  

# Bourgoin: And who are you? A performative perspective  

  

Terrible writing. Academic, abstract, gunk. Fluff. 

#amj-reading
#academic-fluff
#bad-writing

  

# Raffiee: Revisiting the portability of performance paradox. 

  

Portability of performance paradox: stars in one company will not be stars elsewhere. This effect is mitigated when the new firm has complimentary features suitable for the new star. 

  

Keywords

#stars

#performance
#amj-reading

  

# Kim: does negative feedback benefit or harm recipient creativity?

  

When negative feedback goes from subordinate to supervisor, then it's good: subordinates think about task strategies to improve performance. When negative feedback goes from supervisor to subordinate, it's bad: the subordinate feels pressure. 

  

A good example of "we explained the psych mechanisms between a and b," not recognizing that it is simply due to measuring those two things. You are not capturing the world, you're capturing what you choose to measure. 

#amj-reading



  

# Musaji: how long does it take to get to the learning curve? 

  

It takes 19 iterations before the learning curve shows diminishing returns. 

  

Seems highly context dependent

  

Keywords

#learning-curve
#amj-reading

  

# Mell: identity asymmetries  

  

Info sharing in multi team systems is really important. Team identity (we are this or that kind of team, we care about X y z) related to whether teams shared more info across team lines or within and among its members

  

Keywords


#multi-team-systems

































# schneider "people management - fifty years"

Best ways to manage people

Benjamin Schneider's views

Hiring people
- fit matters a lot: assess skills, ability, interest, personality
- use blind checklists to remove hiring manager bias

Engaging people
- to be engaged, workers need
++ to know what is happening and how things work in their companies. clear communication. where is the company going and how will it get there via the peoples' help.
++ rewards commensurate with performance
++ to feel that they matter to the company

Leading people
- manager/leader: role model for how to behave, and to ensure that people know what is important to the company


keywords
#io-best-practices
#schneider-beliefs
#org-psych-total
#engagement





# bradburn & Schmitt "combining cognitive and noncognitive predictors"

Examples of non-cognitive predictors that might be relevant for selection

Knowledge, leadership, social responsibility, adaptatiblity, perseverence, academic values, learning, situational judgement, high school GPA. 

keywords
#non-cognitive-predictors
#job-performance
#selection-measures
#sjt







# Breznau "observing many researchers using the same data"

We observed all decisions made among 73 research teams as they independently conducted studies on the same hypothesis with identical starting data. We find excessive variation of outcomes. Each model deployed to test the hypothesis was unique, which highlights a vast universe of research design variability that is normally hidden from view and suggests humility when presenting and interpreting scientific findings.


keywords
#replication-crisis
#research-decisions
#science-of-science









# anderson kenneth

great writing on cross lagged panel models

https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2022-13893-001


#cross-lagged-panel-models
#dynamic-modeling
#dynamics
#time-series
#unobserved-heterogeneity




# laughter needed on spaceflight

Perhaps the most important insight nasa has gleaned from studying team dynamics—in space and on Earth—is the preciousness of one trait in particular: a sense of humour. Studies of crews overwintering at the South Pole show that a confined group needs people to fulfil various roles, including leader, storyteller and social secretary. But the most important task by far is that of the clown, a person who is funny and also wise enough to understand each member of the group and defuse tensions. Laughter, as much as courage, will sustain astronauts on their long quest to Mars.

keywords
#laughter
#humor
#teams
#isolated-confined-extreme-environments
#team-roles
#nasa






# simple systems can give rise to chaos

simplicity and choas are not two sides of a spectrum

snowflake

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6z4qRhpBIyA&t=631s

#simons-ants
#snowflake
#complexity
#environment-gradients








# banks "where is behavior in organizational behavior?"

Of 2338 commonly studied variables, only 3% are behavioral in nature. 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1048984321000862?via%3Dihub


keywords
#where-behavior
#we-study-attitudes-not-behaviors









# baumeister "psychology as the science of self-reports"

Psychology calls itself the science of behavior, yet some psychological subdisciplines have never directly studied behavior...direct observation has been supplanted by self-reports, hypothetical scenarios, and questionnaire ratings. 


#self-reports
#where-behavior
















# redhead "social hierarchies"

Humans operate many social hierarchies simultaneously. What are some things that shape those dynamics?

We need collective action and coordination. 
- think water irrigation
- think driving on the correct side of road

But doing so is challenging due to free-riding. 

Groups tackle free-riding and reduce the costs of coordinating when certain individuals have more status than others. 

The particular attributes or abilities that confer status are different across contexts, but they are interpreted as providing functional benefits for all group members in the particular socio-ecological setting. 

Status perceptions are of course very likely to fall under stupid badges of worth based on false advertising rather than true competency.



keywords
#social-hierarchies








# victim hood and therapy

There are therapists who see you as an individual with personal agency and believe the purpose of therapy is to help you change.

There are therapists who see you as a helpless victim of external forces and believe the purpose of therapy is to support you in your victimhood. 

Choose wisely.


Clinical psychologists are focusing too much on "victimhood" and supporting people in their victim ideology.

https://twitter.com/fairforall_org/status/1465470737297276936

Everyone is validating people's false perceptions that they live in a learned helplessness environment of racism and oppression.


keywords
#woke
#anti-racism
#psych-safety
#victim-culture
#true-therapy
#unintended-consequences
#making-the-problem-worse
#oppression-narrative
#unhealthy-coping
#great-paper











# Fisher, Risavy et al "Selection myths"

Compared to 2 decades ago, HR practitioners are now worse at identifying personnel selection myths. 

Myths:
- there are only 4 basic dimensions of personality
- conscientiousness better predictors job performance than cognitive ability
- values better predict performance than CA
- most valid employment interviews are designed around an applicant's unique background
- being very intelligent is actually a disadvantage for performing well on a low-skilled job
- emotional intelligence better predicts job performance than CA


keywords
#selection-myths
#lay-beliefs
#cognitive-ability








# failure to replicate dilution effect


https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ijsa.12344

keywords
#dilution-effect
#failure-to-replicate
#disprove-fad









# mertens "how much feedback do employees need?"

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ijsa.12352

Contrary to earlier suggestions that there might be an optimal feedback frequency, we find support for the notion that more feedback is better, without any indication of a downward trend at the highest feedback frequency.

Across a diverse sample, employees reported, on average, 3.8 feedback conversations over a 3-week period. 


keywords
#performance-management
#feedback-frequency
#feedback
#performance-reviews
#mimic-study









# smaldino cultural attractors

Imagine a first individual who invents a dance, focusing primarily on their fancy footwork. An observer with very different cognitive landscape may, frustratingly, fail to appreciate the first dancer’s footwork at all, but instead attend to their arm movements, 180 and therefore end up "recreating" a very different dance. A third individual may attend 181 mainly to the second dancer’s head movements, and so on. It is not that these individuals 182 are copying inaccurately per se, but instead that they do not even agree on what it is they 183 are supposed to copy. If we posit some cognitive function that transforms sensory signals 184 into new behaviors—a cognitive landscape—these individuals have different, but equally 185 valid, functions. In such a situation, there may be social learning occurring in some sense 186 (or at least social influence), but variants would not be expected to cluster in any 187 identifiable way, and indeed it would be hard even to say there exists any cultural variant 188 to evolve (a point made also by Claidière & Sperber, 2007). Conversely, when individuals 189 within a group have highly-aligned cognitive landscapes, productions of a cultural variant 190 can differ substantially in "surface" characteristics while nonetheless retaining the same 191 culturally-relevant core. Consider a participant in a Western population who is asked to 192 draw a smiley face using red pen on a notepad, a second to copy this image using 193 spraypaint on a wall, and a third to copy the second using lego blocks. In this case, they 194 will all likely recognize each product as instances of the same culturally-shared category, 195 despite variation in the medium.

keywords
#noise
#learning
#mimicry
#social-evolution
#copy-with-noise








# smaldino collective problem solving in teams

We studied an agent-based model of collective problem solving in which teams of agents search on an NK landscape and share information about newly found solutions. We analyzed the effects of team members’ behavioral strategies, team size, and team diversity on overall performance. Depending on the landscape complexity and a team’s features a team may eventually find the best possible solution or become trapped at a local maximum. Hard-working agents can explore more solutions per unit time, while risk-taking agents inject randomness in the solutions they test. We found that when teams solve complex problems, both strategies (risk-taking and hard work) have positive impacts on the final score, and the positive effect of moderate risk-taking is substantial. However, risk-taking has a negative effect on how quickly a team achieves its final score. If time restrictions can be relaxed, a moderate level of risk can produce an improved score. If the highest priority is instead to achieve the best possible score in the shortest amount of time, the hard work strategy has the greatest impact. When problems are simpler, risk-taking behavior has a negative effect on performance, while hard work decreases the time required to solve the problem. We also find that larger teams generally solved problems more effectively, and that some of this positive effect is due to the increase in diversity. We show more generally that increasing the diversity of teams has a positive impact on the team’s final score, while more diverse teams also require less time to reach their final solution. This work contributes overall to the larger literature on collective problem solving in teams.

https://www.jasss.org/24/4/10.html

keywords
#hard-work
#agent-based-model
#collective-action
#teamwork
#diversity
#risk-taking
#dionne-simulations









# kim "systems archetypes"

A collection of archetypes of their examples

drifting to goals
escalation
fixes that fail
growth and underinvestment
limits to success
shifting the burden
success to the successful
tragedy of the commons

keywords
#systems-dynamics
#systems-archetypes
#systems-thinking









# Green "diversity wins revisited"

In a series of influential studies, McKinsey (2015, 2018, 2020) report a statistically significant positive relation between the industry-adjusted EBIT margin of global samples of large public firms and the racial/ethnic diversity of their executives. However, when we revisit McKinsey’s tests using recent data for US S&P 500® firms, we find statistically insignificant relations between McKinsey’s inverse normalized Herfindahl-Hirschman measures of executive racial/ethnic diversity and not only industryadjusted EBIT margin, but also industry adjusted sales growth, gross margin, ROA, ROE, and TSR. Our results suggest that despite the imprimatur often given to McKinsey’s (2015, 2018, 2020) studies, caution is warranted in relying on their findings to support the view that US publicly traded firms can deliver improved financial performance if they increase the racial/ethnic diversity of their executives.


keywords
#diversity-delusion
#diversity-bottom-line
#diversity-wins-revisited
#executive-board-diversity
#failure-to-replicate
#disprove-fad









# Michelle Tandler SAT boosting

https://twitter.com/michelletandler/status/1471894673346244611

Harvard adjusts SAT scores to make it easier/harder for some groups to get in.

Winners: wealthy minorities, legacies, medium-performing blacks and hispanics

Losers: high performing whites and asians (especially poor ones), non-legacies.


keywords
#admissions-sat
#admissions-scandal
#selection-diversity
#selection
#act-sat
#diversity-delusion
#selection-bias
#college-admissions
#anti-woke
#minority-benefit











# compare study to (well-written) blog

Intermittent fasting

study
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scitranslmed.abd8034
blog
https://peterattiamd.com/is-alternate-day-fasting-superior-to-calorie-restriction-for-fat-loss-in-lean-adults/


keywords
#undergrad-reading
#research-methods
#undergrad-homework
#scientific-literacy











# cole "peer victimization in college survey"

Construct validity study of a new measure


https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8477356/

#construct-validity
#measure-development
#psychometrics
#how-to-create-a-scale
#develop-an-assessment














# jones "helping or harming? effect of trigger warnings"

We found no evidence that trigger warnings were helpful for trauma survivors, for participants who self-reported a posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosis, or for participants who qualified for probable PTSD, even when survivors’ trauma matched the passages’ content. We found substantial evidence that trigger warnings countertherapeutically reinforce survivors’ view of their trauma as central to their identity.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZFyl8wmKqg

why shouldn't you use trigger warnings?
- trigger warnings do not improve student's mental health
- they lead faculty to avoid important topics

17 studies show that TW don't alleviate emotional distress (among people with and without trauma). 

Trigger warnings lead people to think that trauma is the most central aspect of their life. 

It promotes the idea that students are fragile. It causes the students to be hypervigilant about any material that might be stressful.


keywords
#unintended-consequences
#intervention-backfires
#trigger-warnings-dont-work
#clinical-psych
#anti-woke
#identity
#disprove-fad











# Moreau "how malleable are cognitive abilities"

Many games purport to increase cognitive abilities. Here, I show that these claims are false.

https://psyarxiv.com/sxwah/

keywords
#cognitive-ability
#intelligence
#gaming
#cognitive-games
#failure-to-replicate
#disprove-fad












# heather mac donald "white parents culpable; black parents blameless"

When gang-shooters are black, we cannot blame the parents:

On April 19, 2021, McDonald’s CEO Chris Kempczinski suggested in a text to Chicago’s mayor that the parents of two children recently killed in Chicago’s gang activity had “failed those kids.” Kempczinski’s text became public in November 2021, prompting widespread accusations of racism and calls for his resignation. Kempczinski confessed to his white privilege and apologized profusely for holding parents responsible for the fate of their children.

When shooters are white, we can blame the parents:

On December 3, a district attorney in Michigan filed involuntary manslaughter charges against the parents of Ethan Crumbley. The 15-year-old Crumbley allegedly killed four fellow students during a shooting rampage at his Oxford, Michigan high school on November 30. The prosecutor based her indictment of Crumbley’s parents on the fact that they had allowed Ethan to access a legally purchased handgun and ought to have known that the boy was primed to kill his classmates. The press, Democratic politicians, and gun control advocates greeted the homicide charges against the Crumbley parents with ecstatic approval.



https://www.city-journal.org/school-shootings-color-coded-parenting-standard-of-the-media?utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=Organic_Social

keywords
#double-standard
#reverse-racism
#anti-structural-racism
#anti-woke
#diversity-delusion
#woke-racism














# stevens heterodox academy: free speech on campus

There is a free-speech problem on college campuses, and it is coming from the left. 

Six essays in March asserted that “there is no campus free speech crisis,” as Acadia U. political scientist Jeffrey Sachs put it in the Twitter thread that launched the wave of skepticism. In our first post responding to the skeptics, we argued that they went wrong by basing their case primarily on GSS data about the Millennial generation. We explained why the debate hinges not on Millennials but on the generation after them—iGen, or Gen Z—who began replacing Millennials in college in 2013. In this post we draw on five other datasets to show that there are reasons for concern about the speech climate on campus, and there are reasons to think that it is changing since 2015. We address three questions: 1) Is the speech climate (i.e., willingness to speak up) worsening on college campuses, overall, in recent years? We show that it is. 2) Is there a “politically correct” range of viewpoints on campus? We show that there is. 3) Which side of the spectrum is the bigger threat to free speech on campus? We show that students on the left and right used to be similar in their desire to “disinvite” speakers or shout them down, but since 2013 the right has used those tactics much less often while the left has used them much more often. In conclusion, the skeptics are right to demand evidence for claims about change, but wrong to say that there is no such evidence.


https://heterodoxacademy.org/blog/the-skeptics-are-wrong-part-2/


keywords
#free-speech-college
#heterodox-academy
#woke-racism
#speech-climate












# james clear "danger of perfection in pursuit of good"

If you want to perform well, you need to output a lot. Eventually, one of those outputs will be good. 

Jerry Uelsmann divided his film photography students into two groups: the quantity group (graded on the amount of photos you submit) and the quality group (submit one photograph and it will be graded on its quality).

At the end of the term, all of the best photos were submitted by the quantity group. 

https://jamesclear.com/repetitions

more james clear
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNeXuCYiE0U


keywords
#performance
#creativity
#habits
#repetition-is-king
#viral-through-repetition
#put-in-your-reps
#learning
#quantity-over-quality










# NIH scientists fauci silences great scientists

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3jT59eDDB7U

"we need this shut down"

Even at places where "true science" is supposedly taking place, there is an effort to silence contrarian views. 

keywords
#free-speech
#pandemic-silencing
#scientific-hushing
#silencing-scientific-debate
#damming-fauci-emails











# the problem in education is not funding

The problem in education isn't funding:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nOksqfGZUI


Schools given an unbelievable amount of money after covid surge. What do they do with it? Build tennis courts. Build an outdoor learning exploration. Upgrade the student ID card system. 

In California, they use it to adjust the curriculum in a terrible way: "we are no longer offering advanced mathematics courses. Kids deserve to be in heterogeneous classrooms." They stopped allowing gifted kids to take calculus in high school. They took away opportunities from the brightest kids. 


keywords
#funding-not-the-problem
#school-performance
#economics
#throwing-money-at-a-problem
#unintended-consequences
#woke-racism










# the two defining positions on vaccines

images/vaccine-positions

Lefty's hate you if you are not vaccinated.
Righty's don't care.

keywords
#right-left-differences
#leave-me-alone-stance
#political-psych
#covid-politics










# gucciardi "the emergence of team resilience"

The matheiu composition equations applied to team resilience.

Similar to steve writing. A lot of academese but nothing truly meaningful stated anywhere.



matheiu equations simulation

0) Likelihood of emergence of between unit differences

The closer team effectiveness becomes to a random walk, the more likely it is to generate between unit differences. 

Two types of emergence
- between unit slope differences
- between unit amount differences

if alpha = 1, emergence
if alpha = 0.9, close to emergence
if alpha = 0.8, not quite emergence


What makes TE a random walk?
- large error. When luck is involved
- stabilitly of TE
- stability of the terms within TE


REMEMBER, THIS IS THE CREATION OF BETWEEN UNIT DIFFERENCES EVEN THOUGH THE PROCESSES ARE IDENTICAL ACROSS UNITS. 


how to frame the paper?
- if two teams exhibit the same teamwork, same competencies, and exist in the same environment, will they perform the same? No
- Two different teams, despite having the same levels of teamwork and task competencies, will have stable between team differences.  



1) combine with the emergence of between unit differences 

if team effectiveness is a random walk, you would expect between team differences. 

if the performance of individuals are rws, you would expect between person differences.



2) how quickly things emerge

Carter said that visibility determines how fast things emerge.

Closeness to a random walk also determines how fast things emerge.

yt = 0.1yt-1 -> no or slow emergence
yt = 1.0yt-1 -> fast emergence



3) The most important levers for managers

Run a parameter sweep on each term in the M equations. Which improves TE the most across the range of its values?

They are all sums, which means the demonstration above should show no differences across the parameters.

In real life, improving one of the variables will surely improve performance to a larger extent than improving another term. 
- which means 0.8*term 
- or performance is not a linear combination



keywords
#mimic-study
#ob-agent-based-model
#leadership-quarterly
#matheiu-equations
#team-resilience
#kozlowski-ish-writing
#bad-writing
#academese





# stern "the liberal illusion of uniqueness"

Liberals posses a greater desire than conservatives to be unique.

Liberals think they are more unique than other liberals.
Conservatives think they are more similar to other conservatives.

Conservatives are more different from one another than they believe.
Liberals are more similar to one another than they believe.


keywords
#political-psychology
#teams
#need-for-uniqueness
#liberal-conservative
#political-differences













# Tourish "the triumph of nonsense"

Given that such journals insist on the primacy of theory development, we also increasingly resort to convoluted, pretentious and long-winded prose to at least create the illusion of ‘theory development.’ The result is writing that can only be understood by those already on the inside of the debates it references. As opposed to ‘imposter syndrome’, in which qualified people doubt their suitability for a given job, I suggest that many of us have become ‘genuine imposters’ in that we pretend to be doing more important work, and more competently, than we really are.

keywords
#bad-writing
#theory-problem
#nonsense-in-management
#academese













# larson "multilevel examination of trust"

Good resource for trust, if needed.

#trust
#team-trust
#multi-level-trust












# woo et al "bias and fairness in graduate adissions"

Standardized tests (GRE, SAT, ACT) are psychometrically sound. Yes, you will find group differences, but that does not indicate "ism." GPA and GRE are predictivly valid for grad school, and they are much better than alternatives like letters of rec. 

keywords
#anit-woke
#college-admissions
#graduate-admissions
#sat-act
#selection













# Eliav "humor and creativity"

Humor is useful in organizations because it enhances creativity (through emotional, cognitive, and social means).

keywords
#humor-in-orgs
#creativity













# falk "subjective patterns of randomness"

On a checkers grid, "chance" to humans means evenly dispersed squares, even though true chance often leads to clustering. 


keywords
#chance
#lay-beliefs
#human-perception-of-random










# falling objects lieberson

We spend too much time on variance theory. Take variation in X to explain variation in Y. Useless.

Statistical modeling is about identifying variation among units, then incorporating predictors to account for that variance.

Consider falling objects of different weights. You can predict the ccrap out of falling speeds Y by referencing weights X.

But you haven't spent a moment talking about gravity. 

The research will conclude "there is a complete understanding ot eh phenomenon because all differences among the objects under study have been accounted for." Something must be wrong if social research methods would lead the investigator to believe he had a full grasp of falling objects without ever invoking gravity.

The pursuit of variance will lead to a focus on the deviations and the statistical modeling of variations rather than the fundamental process.  

keywords
#gravity-problem
#falling-bodies-problem
#variance-theory
#theory-building
#models












# denrell "outcome-quality dip"

Are firms with high market share (popular) more likely to have superior management and effective routines than unpopular firms?

No, if the process is reinforcing. 

Well-resourced but bad firms will reach medium quality (because they were well-resourced early on). Over time, these bad firms will remain at the middle. 

Unlucky but great firms will, over time, drive toward just below medium level. 

Lucky and great firms will shoot the the top and stay there. 



Cool writing on performance management. How interpreting performance goes wrong.



What is denrell saying in the dip paper?

The relationship between quality and some outcome proxy (e.g., income, popularity, market success, realized performance) reduces to zero or becomes negative at medium levels of the outcome -- if the outcome process is reinforcing. 

The intuition: all actors who were lucky early (e.g., lots of resources so they had high Y [performance, income, success]) will reach a medium outcome, regardless of their level of X (quality, trait). Once there, only low X (quality) people will stay at a medium level of Y (performance). An outcome Y just below medium level is more impressive because it is likely to have been achieved despite having few resources/without early luck. 

In other words, high quality people with early luck advance to greatness. Low quality people with early luck advance to medium success. High quality people with early bad luck advance to just below medium success. Low quality people with early bad luck don't advance. 


A modified version of our model, in which income depends on individual traits and stochastic shocks and is subject to reinforcement, may generate an income-skill dip. Incomes may be subject to a process of cumulative disadvantage, as bad luck and initial setbacks are amplified in a vicious circle (Elman and Angela 2004, Schafer et al. 2011, Maroto 2012). For example, failure to graduate, combined with high debt, may leave college students in a poor financial situation, forcing them to accept any available job. If merit, such as high cognitive skill, cannot compensate for such bad luck, individuals with superior merit may be stuck at low income levels. Lucky or privileged individuals with medium cognitive skills may reach medium incomes. Overall, this suggests that the income-merit association may not only be low but negative for some medium income levels, an implication which can be tested with data on cognitive skills and income.


It is well known that reinforcing processes may lead to a low correlation between quality and realized performance, because even low-quality products may occasionally achieve success if they happen to gain early popularity (Merton 1968, Chase 1980, Arthur 1989, Carroll and Harrison 1994, Skvoretz et al. 1996, Lynn et al. 2009). However, previous literature has not questioned whether higher performance indicates higher quality.


keywords
#performance-management
#observing-performance
#rewarding-performance
#performance-appraisal
#outcome-quality-dip
#reinforcing-process










# Neumark & Wascher, 2006 "Minimum wage and employment: a review"

Although the evidence is mixed, the vast majority of studies indicate a negative effect of minimum wages on employment. Two other conclusions emerge from our review. Few studies, if any, provide convincing evidence of positive employment effects of minimum wages. Second, there are strong negative effects of minimum wage among studies that focus on the least-skilled groups. 


keywords
#minimum-wage
#economics










# Neumark, "Age discrimination in hiring"

http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/early/2021/08/31/jhr.0420-10831R1.abstract

In one, age is revealed simultaneously with other applicant information; job offer rates are much lower for older than for younger job applicants. In the second, interview selections are based on detailed, age-blind on-line applications, while subsequent interviews are not age-blind; older applicants are not under-selected for interviews, but face a lower job offer rate after in-person interviews. The combined evidence is consistent with age discrimination.


keywords
#selection
#hiring
#age-discrimination
#audit-study







# Cappelli & Neumark, "Do high performance work practices improve establishment outcomes?"

Our results suggest that work practices that transfer power to employees, often described as “high performance” practices, may rise productivity, although the statistical case is weak. However, we also find that these work practices on average raise labor costs per employee. The net result is no apparent effect on efficiency, a measure that combines labor costs and labor productivity. 

GREAT INTRO ON WHY IO PSCHOLOGISTS THINK PSYCH IN THE WORKPLACE IS NECESSARY

...share the view that mass production systems sharply limit the control and decision-making autonomy of employees, ignoring important psychological and social needs of employees in the process. As a result, they not only fail to tap important sources of motivation and ideas from employees but in many cases cause employees to withhold effort and compliance with management directions. 

Results
- high performance practices have small effects on employee performance (sales)
- high perf practices have large effects on labor costs (compesation per employee)
- so, hpp raise wages but don't really help employee productivity



keywords
#human-resources
#economics
#labor-relations
#organizational-performance
#motivation
#great-paper
#disprove-fad










# Neumark & Button, "Is it harder for older workers to find jobs?"

Good description of age discrimination.

keywords
#economics
#audit-study
#age-discrimination




# Lordan & Neumark, 2018 "People versus machines"

We study the effect of minimum wage increases on employment in automatable jobs – jobs in
which employers may find it easier to substitute machines for people – focusing on low skilled workers for whom such substitution may be spurred by minimum wage increases. Based on CPS data from 1980-2015, we find that increasing the minimum wage decreases significantly the share of automatable employment held by low-skilled workers, and increases the likelihood that lowskilled workers in automatable jobs become nonemployed or employed in worse jobs. The average effects mask significant heterogeneity by industry and demographic group, including substantive adverse effects for older, low-skilled workers in manufacturing. We also find some evidence that the same changes improve job opportunities for higher-skilled workers.




keywords
#economics
#automation
#minimum-wage
#future-of-work






# Neumark, "women helping women? role-model and mentoring effects"

One potential method to increase the success of female graduate students in economics may be to encourage mentoring relationships between these students and female faculty members. Increased hiring of female faculty is viewed as one way to promote such mentoring relationships, perhaps because of role-model effects. A more direct method of promoting such relationships may be for female graduate students to have female faculty serve as dissertation chairs. The evidence in this paper addresses the question of whether either of these strategies results in more successful outcomes for female graduate students. 

The evidence provides no support for the hypothesis that outcomes for female graduate students are improved by adding female faculty members, or by having a female dissertation chair.

keywords
#mentoring
#diversity
#match-demographics
#female-female-mentoring
#economics
#anti-woke
#failure-to-replicate
#prove-wrong
#disprove-fad











# rieger "on the generality of age differences in economic decision making"

With western populations, greater age is associated with more prosocial tendencies in economics games. 

They examine non-western (Moroccan) people. Effects don't hold. 

The relationship between age and decision making is not universal and is shaed by local culture. 


keywords
#behavioral-economics
#economics-games
#age
#aging-workforce





# charness "cooperation and competition in intergenerational experiments"

People are retiring later. Do near-retirees cooperate less than youngers in economics games?

No. If anything, they are slightly more cooperative. 

keywords
#aging-workforce
#economics-games
#behavioral-economics





# lerman "computational social scientist beware: simpson's paradox"

Simpson's paradox everywhere.

Seemingly negative effect against women at UC Berkley: a smaller fraction of female applicants were admitted for graduate studies. However, when admissions data was disaggregated by department, women had parity and even a slight advantage over men. 

How do you handle it? Ask yourself whether the people in the data represent significant sub-groups that need to be accounted for.
- e.g., when analyzing prison recitivism, you need to analyze the data separating by one-time offenders and repeat offenders. 


keywords
#simpsons-paradox






# feng & hancock "an analytical framework for research questions with variability as the outcome or predictor"

U Maryland crew proposing multilevel SEM for variability. 

keywords
#variability-modeling
#consensus-emergence
#model-variance
#heterogeneity-modeling
#nuttall-presentation












# zhang et al "teamsense: assessing personal affect and group cohesion in small temas through dyadic interaction and behavior aanlysis"

Example writing for nasa ICE crews.

keywords
#nasa
#isolated-confined-extreme
#kozlowski-lab











# stepleton, yang, hancock "construct meaning in multilevel settings"

Great writing on multi level thinking, clarity, and ICCs

keywords
#multi-level-modeling
#iccs
#multi-level-constructs






# wiernik & dahlke "obtaining unbiased results in meta-analysis"

Good paper to mimic for a simulation on measurement

keywords
#measurement
#simulation-study-mimic
#mimic-paper
#psychometrics














# flyvbjerg "top ten behavioral biases in project management"

strategic misrepresentation
- distort info on purpose (announce budget that isn't true but sounds good politically)

optimism bias / overconfidence / availability
- make decisions based on ideal future vision rather than weighting realistic gains, losses, and probabilities. overestimate benefits and overlook costs
- underestimate chance

uniqueness bias
- planners tend to see their projects as unique

planning fallacy
- estimates for task completion are far too low

availability bias
- overweight what comes to mind easily

base rate neglect
- ignore general data pertinant to situation

escalation of commitment
- justify increased investment based on cumulative prior investment


keywords
#behavioral-economics
#behavioral-biases
#project-management
#performance-management
#escalation-of-commitment 

















# mary waller "conceptualizing emergent states"

Precise review on emergence.

what emerges in teams?
- states like collective cognition or affect
- behavior patterns like routines or feedback seeking
- structures like sub-groups or hierarchies

four characteristics of emergent phenomenon

1) "global"

a construct exists at both lower and higher levels
and it is distinct at both

2) "coherent" or inertia

the collect entity endures for at least some amount of time

3) ostensive

the construct can be experienced by team members

4) radical novelty

the collective thing was not previously observed just by looking at the lower level features



(c) actually measure lower level interactions

As Humphrey and Aime (2014) noted, most research on groups and teams privilege treatments that rely on static aggregation of constructs to approximate emergent phenomena rather than investigate and chart the dynamic interaction that gives rise to novel states, patterns and structures. As a consequence we, as a field, have created a “black box” that is often left unexplored; the methodologies used to explore emergent states fail to capture the global essence of these phenomena. This issue is most clear in research that measures individuals’ more stable characteristics such as intelligence or ability and aggregates these measures to suggest the existence of a team-level emergent state. 

(d) no emergence

Our current methods rely mostly on ascertaining the level of a state (at one or multiple points in time) from low to high, always assuming emergence and endurance. For example, we ask members to report the level of trust or conflict in their groups, rather than asking if trust or conflict exist. Not surprisingly, most members comply by providing an answer to what could be a leading question. Our science and approach assume that a focal emergent state must be present—perhaps at a low level, but present nonetheless; we do not or cannot account for moments when emergence has not occurred, although absence of a key property is central to understanding a phenomenon. 


(e) mimic Klep

Klep, Wisse, and Van der Flier (2011), who distinguish between dynamic and static pathways in the development of group mood. The dynamic path is characterized by interactive affective sharing processes such as contagion, affective comparison processes, and open communication about emotional experiences. In contrast, the static path reflects how mood can stem from members’ similarity in personality or exposure to similar emotional events. The authors examined the effect of group mood on three outcomes (i.e. belongingness, information sharing, and group performance) and hypothesized that the strength of each effect would depend on whether mood is the result of interactive affective processes or similarities in team members’ affective experiences. Through an experimental study they found that the dynamic path to group mood has a stronger influence on outcomes than the static path. Nevertheless, their analysis did not detect any difference in the level of positive or negative mood across mood development conditions (i.e. interactive versus non-interactive). Their results nicely highlight how knowledge of group mood, in and of itself, is not sufficient to identify the path through which it has developed (i.e. dynamic versus static) or the factors that contributed to its development (e.g. interactive affective processes versus exposure to common emotional experiences). As a result, in order to accurately predict the influence of group mood on team outcomes, researchers need to not only collect data on the current level of mood within the team, but also the possible paths for its development.


keywords
#emergent-states
#teams
#emergence

































# jones et al. "vocational interests and adverse impact"

Equation/montecarlo/simulation study of adverse impact in JAP.

keywords
#psychometrics-mimic
#selection
#adverse-impact
#newman-equations-paper
#measurement















# ludwig "using public feedback and competitive rewards to increase"

Public, individual feedback about safety driving among pizza drivers increased their safe driving behaviors. 

Behavior X was incentivized and given feedback at store A, behavior Y was incenstivied and given feedback at store B.
- at store A, behavior X increased
- at store B, behavior Y increased

This study investigated the effects of a safe driving compe- tition facilitated by publicly-posted individual feedback. The turn-signal use, safety-belt use, and complete intersection stopping of 82 pizza deliver- ers were observed at two experimental and three control stores, as well as among the civilian population. After baseline observations, pizza deliver- ers received posted weekly individual feedback on their turn-signal use (at Store A) or complete intersection stops (at Store B). The deliverers’ safe driving scores were posted individually on a vertical scale along with their names. Each week the deliverer with the highest average performance was rewarded with a free vehicle-maintenance coupon. Turn-signal use among drivers at Store A (n = 24) increased 22 percentage points from baseline to the intervention phase which was maintained into the withdrawal phase. Complete intersection stopping among drivers at Store B (n = 21) increased 17 percentage points from baseline to the intervention phase and was main- tained into the withdrawal phase. 

keywords
#performance-management
#rewards
#incentives
#behavior-management
#aba-design
#intervention
#feedback
#competitive-rewards















# sturman "uncontrolled control variables"

Simulation/montecarlo publication in JAP. 

keywords
#psychometrics-mimic
#measurement




















# thomas "two decades of cognitive bias research in entrepreneeurship"

Summary review article. What are the predictors and outcomes of various cognitive biases that have been studied among entrepreneurs?

cognitive biases
- escalation of commitment
- overconfidence
- illusion of control

Biases occur frequently in the entrepreneurial context because entrepreneurs are often required to make decisions in complex situations without complete knowledge or all relevant facts. Consequences can be positive or negative. These simplifying biases may lead to systematic errors and suboptimal outcomes, such as low survival chances for new ventures and low average financial returns. However, these cognitive biases may be essential and facilitate entreprenurial decisions. For example, new ventures are generally created under highly uncertain and ambiguous conditions, so biases may provide an effective way to approximiate the appropriate decisions, as more comprehensive and cautious decision-making is not possible. 

keywords
#cognition
#cognitive-biases-among-entrepreneurs
#entrepreneurship














# huggmeier & zacher "the basic income"

Would people continue to work if they received a basic univeral income?

reasons for "yes":

(a) lottery question research

"You by chance inherited enough money to live comfortably without working. Would you work anyway?"
Many answer yes
- to keep occupied
- depends heavily on occupation

true lottery winners also tend to keep working


#universal-basic-income
#io-perspectives
#mimic-study




















# alaybek "the relations of reflective and intuitive thinking styles with task performance"

MA relationships between reflective and intuitive thinking style and task performance.

reflective
- preference to engage in conscious, controlled, analytic, and high effort information processing across situations
- strong relationship with task performance, especially in high task complexity
- over and above CA and conscientiousness

intuitive
- preference for engaging in automatic, emotional, and low effort info processing across situations
- weak relationship with task performance


keywords
#thinking-styles
#cognitive-ability
#use-this-measure
#use-this-assessment
#teams-measure
#important-individual-difference

















# alaybek "all's well that ends (and peaks) well?"

The peak-end rule (Fredrickson & Kahneman, 1993) asserts that, when people retrospectively evaluate an experience (e.g., the previous workday), they rely more heavily on the episode with peak intensity and on the final (end) episode than on other episodes in the experience. We meta-analyzed 174 effect sizes and found strong support for the peak-end rule.

keywords
#performance-management
#performance-evaluation
#performance-appraisal
#ghestalt-characteristics
#peak-end-rule
#dynamic-appraisal

















# buehler "the planning fallacy"

A review of the planning fallacy

People underestimate the time it will take to complete a future task. 


keywords
#planning-fallacy
#cognitive-bias

























# korsgaard "the emergence of intragroup conflict"

Prior research on conflict examines group or individual predictors like diversity and contextual factors. In reality, conflict emerges from lower-level processes. 

This paper proposes how conflict emerges. 



(a) what is conflict?

conflict is the perception of incompatibility of goals or interests between parties. 
- unfolds between two or more parties, at the center of which is a negative encounter

(b) antecedent conditions allowing conflict to occur

contextual:
- interdependence
- norms
- social dilemmas
- mixed motive negotiations
- diversity

individual
- avoidant people
- cultural values
- aggression, anger, hostile people
- some experience or perceive more conflict than others

(c) issues of emergence

Most conflict research has equated intragroup conflict with composition models of emergence. The typical study will operationalize intragroup conflict by: (a) administering a self-report of intragroup conflict to members, (b) statistically evaluate whether agreement is present, and (c) aggregate scores to the group level by taking the average. 

The composition model of conflict emergence is an appropriate assumption in some situations. However, it is only one type of emergence.

Averaging individual scores may obscure different patterns of conflict, or fail to find conflict if there is not a sufficient number of people who share the perception. 

Some then jump to compilation and variability. Jehn et al. (2010) argue that conflict asymmetry is masked by using group averages. For example, six out of eight group members may perceive no conflict, resulting in a high agreement index, but one-fourth of the group perceives conflict. Indeed, they found that greater conflict asymmetry within the group resulted in lower performance and creativity. 

However, operationalizing such asymmetry using the within-group standard deviation only recognizes that there is asymmetry; it does not model or recognize how conflit emerges from the individual-level cognition, affect, or behavior of individuals. 

Therefore, one must also specify the cross-level process of emergence to explain how different patterns of conflict develop. 

(d) four configurations of intragroup conflict

[christopher note]
I don't know why these are necessary. Before getting to their theory of how conflict emerges, for some reason they feel the need to propose different conflict "patterns," meaning arrangements like [a] person A conflict person B no conflict vs [b] person A no conflict person B conflict. 

- aggregate dyadic

When the group is divided into two distinct coalitions. They need not perceive conflict to the same degree. 

The group mean would be misleading.

You need a cluster analysis of groups. 

- aggregate multiple

Group is divided into multiple coalitions. The subgroups may not be the same size, have the same status, or perceive conflict to the same degree. 

You need the standard deviation.

- active passive

This conflict occurs when some group members are actively engaged in conflict whereas others are passive. 
- passive members observe conflict episodes, but they are not directly involved. 

You need a network index.

- one many

When conflict is perceived differently by one member. Perhaps the minority individual perceives greater conflict than the rest of the group. 

You need to look at min, max, or outliers. 

(e) pathways to conflict configurations -- finally getting to the theory of emergence

To understand how different conflict patterns (configurations) emerge, we explore three related processes by which conflict spreads through a group.

- direct contact

Conflict spreads through negative encounters. 

The extent to which negative encounters yield one pattern (configuration) or another depends on networks. 

In a "equal connectivity" network (they call this cohesive, meaning that everyone is connected to everyone and interacts at similar frequencies), then negative encounters will probably yield aggregate-multiple conflict in which individuals or multiple coalitions are in direct conflict with one another. In "isolated clusters" networks (or structural equivalence, meaning that there are few, common links), negative encounters will produce active-passive conflict where some members are engaged in conflict and others are less so. 


- indirect contact

Bob expresses frustration he has with Susie to Jill; Jill then adopts the attitude. 

With this form, groups would over time change from active-passive conflict to aggregate-dyadic or aggregate-multiple. 

Or Bob witnesses Susie be a jerk to Jill; Bob then becomes angry (contagion). 

With this form (contagion), you would witness aggregate-multiple conflict. 


- conflict alignment

Sub-groups are sometimes caused by other forces. High resource or power people form a coalition with other high resource or power people. Close proximity people form a coalition with other close people. People with similar interests form a coalition. 

When resources and power are evenly distributed, you should witness aggregate-multiple conflict (with several coalitions).

When resources and power are unevenly distributed, you should witness one-many conflict. 




[christopher notes]
This is still not a theory of emergence. Compare this to boid rules. Compare this to design satisfaction paper. If individual A operates according to rules X, Y, and Z, then over time you get something unique at the group level. 



keywords
#conflict
#emergence
#mimic-emergence-writing
#conflict-emergence




































# Bonnery, Feng, Henneberger "the promise and limitations of synthetic data"

We want to give people access to government data, but we also need to retain confidentiality. 

Simulate data based on the true relationships present in the government data. Then give external researchers the synthetic data.

This paper reviews the benefits and drawbacks of doing so.

keywords
#confidentiality
#government-data
#ari-interest
#science-of-science
#simulations
#synthetic-data









































# sturman "the past, present, and future of dynamic performance research"


A huge review of longitudinal (not dynamic) performance research.

(a) defining job performance

Job performance
- behaviors that are under the control of the individual that contribute to the goals of the organization
- job performance can be both behaviors (effort) and results (sales)

Past ways people studied "dynamic" performance
- rank order of performance scores across employees changes from month to month, or year to year
- validity of a variable predicting performance changes over time
- changes in average, group level performance

Sturman definition of dynamic performance
- a lack of stability in job performance (behaviors) over time



(b) past research streams on performance changing in and of itself

Simplex
- as the time-span between measures increases, the correlation between predictor and performance decreases
- this suggests that the validity of selection devices cannot be generalized across time
- this research provides undeniable support for the lack of performance consistency

He states that there is an abundence of research supporting the idea that performance changes over time. 

Lack of research on the implications of "performance changes over time" for selection. 


Performance trends research
- predictors of trends
- consequences of trends


(c) why does the relationship between predictors and performance change over time?

+ Changing-subjects model (or changing person model)

The KSAOs that people posses -- and that cause performance -- change over time. Because these performance-causing characteristics change over time, performance levels change even if the contribution of these characteristics to performance remains constant. 

[christopher note]
It isn't clear to me whether he posits that the changing subjects model explains (a) why performance changes or (b) why the relationship between predictors and performance changes.

+ Changing-tasks model 

An individual's performance changes because the determinants of performance change
- job requirements, new technology, new duties, promotions
- these require new or additional skills



(d) a basic model of longitudinal performance

pt = b*stable-characteristics + b*dynamic-characteristics(t) + e


(e) some theories of performance 

+ Ackerman stage model of skill acquisition

Three phases of skill acquisision
- cognitive: strong demand on cognitive ability. performance speed and accuracy increase quickly
- associative: the stimulus-response connections are refined
- automatic: tasks completed without full attention of performer

Mental ability is demanded in the cognitive phase, then its demand decreases.
Perceptual speed demand starts slow, is required in stage two, then its demand decreases.
Psychomotor ability demand is required when you get to automatic. 

+ Murphy application of Ackerman's stage model to job performance

Two stages
- transition: new employee or major job duties change. Must acquire new info; can't rely on past experience
- maintenance: job is now well-learned. Cognitive ability is less important; personality and motivation more important.


+ Keil and Cortina "Eureka effect"

Sudden experiential insights that produce sudden jumps in performance. 

+ Learning curve theory

People learn by doing.
As experience with the task increases, the resources required to complete the task decrease. 
[christopher note]
This definition is different from my own understanding. Learning curve theory states that performance improvements come quickly and then are subject to diminishing returns. When I first learn piano, my performance improves by leaps and bounds. As the months continue, my piano performance continues to improve, but at a much slower rate. 















# Stachowski, waller "The benefits of flexible team interaction during crisis"

A primary reason for using a team is the belief that teams are proficient in responding to dynamic and complex situations. One situation that requires teams to respond rapidly and accurately is a crisis. 

How do teams respond to crisis?

Team effectiveness was associated with shedding patterns of established interaction, as the better performing crews exhibited fewer sysetmatic patterns of interaction. 

Better performing crews did not follow outlined routines.

Although it may be counterintuitive, training should foster actors that engage in briefer, direct, and less inclusive interactions (short, sweet, non-inclusive interactions) needed for complex, dynamic teams.

data
- 14 nuclear power plant crews in simulation
- coded 11 behaviors of interaction by looking at videos of their simulation


keywords
#teams
#team-effectiveness
#responding-to-crisis
#adaptability
#resilience























# denrell "selection bias and the perils of benchmarking"

Managers learn by example (and consultants give case studies). Classic error of selection bias. The theoretically correct way to discover what makes a business successful is to look at both thriving and floundering companies. 

keywords
#selection-bias













# data science is mostly cleaning

images/datascience-1
iamges/datascience-2

Don't worry about machine learning, artificial intelligence, analytics, etc. 

Basic data manipulation, cleaning, and visualization is where your understanding happens. Many people who can run complex ML models still don't have deep understanding of patterns because they don't do deep dive cleaning, manipulation, or plotting. 

keywords
#data-science
#data-management
#data-manipulation



















# yang et al. "the effects of remote work on collaboration among information workers"

The pandemic caused microsoft workers to switch from in-person to remote. What are the effects of firm-wide remote work on collaboration and communication?

Remote work caused the collaboration network to become more static and siloed, with fewer bridges between disparate parts.



keywords
#remote-work
#natural-experiment
#pandemic
#covid
#work-arranagements
#distant-work
















# murphy "performance evaluation will not die, but it should"

Companies spend millions on performance reviews, but there is little evidence that people enjoy them, find them useful, or change based on their implementation. 

(a) issue 1: the distribution of performance

If performance is truly power law distributed, then stars produce a majority of the output. Their efforts should be easy to spot. Moreover, the variation among the non-stars doesn't really matter. 

If most people perform at similar levels, then the only distinction that matters is between stars and everyone else. 

(b) issue 2: not possible to obtain good judgemental measures of performance

The most common performance appraisal measures (self-ratings, boss-ratings, co-worker ratings) are poor indicators of true employee performance.

And they are subject to many biases.

(c) issue 3: performance feedback is not accepted or useful to recipients

Kluger and DeNisi repeatedly find that feedback decreases as commonly as it increases performance.

Both managers and employees also dread the experience.

Lots of concerns about fairness, or that feedback is rude or harsh. 

(d) issue 4: the org purpose of performance evaluation

If performance eval is for the purpose of training, then you need to examine within individuals and separate someone's strengths and weaknesses. 

If performance appraisals are designed to make distinctions between employees, then you need to examine variability across people.

Thus, a performance appraisal system designed for training needs is likely to be useless for identifying candidates for a raise or promotion, and vice versa. 

This distinction is not well-understood by organizations. Most companies use the same, limited performance eval for both purposes. 




What does he propose?
Stop evaluating and start coaching. 
Work with your subordinates by helping to translate broad goals into specific actions and role processes that employees can undertake. Here is how things work, here is what we need you to do. 




keywords
#performance-management
#performance-evaluation
#performance-appraisal
#great-paper
#coaching
































# hattie "the paradox of reducing class size"

What are the effects of reducing class sizes in schools? Some say doing so is great. Some say doing so is terrible.

The true answer: it depends on your DV.
- for teachers, reducing class sizes makes their job more enjoyable
- for students, reducing class sizes doesn't increase their educational scores



keywords
#class-size
#learning
#performance
#criterion-problem
#what-is-your-dv
#college-performnace
#academic-performance































# makadok "doing the right thing and knowing the right thing to do"

Primary purpose of strategic management: explain inter-firm heterogeneity in firm performance.

Here are some perspectives, and how they apply to the case of Microsoft -- a small, unknown company -- outperforming IBM, a huge, well-known company. 

Governance perspective
- differences in firm performance are due to the ways in which policies are set and enacted in orgs
- IBM was slow to develop a personal computer when apple and microsoft did so. It's management committee provided only a shoestring budget to a task-force to look into microcomputers (rather than mainframe computers).
- It then had to outsource and purchase directly from microsoft and apple.
- IBM had internal policy conflicts between its divisions. 
- By contrast, the entrepreneurial, owner-managed microsoft, every employee and manager was on the same page. 

Competence-based perspective
- firms are heterogeneous in their competence to deliver desirable results, such as low costs
- the consequences of heterogeneity in competence have been heavily studied
- the antecedents of heterogeneity in competence have been far less studied
- the question of how heterogeneity in competence arises (where no heterogeneity existed previously -- de novo) has been the focus of only a handful of papers developing and elaborating a "strategic factor market" theory (Barney, 1986; Makadox, 2001, 2002; Makadok & Barney, 2001).
- Microsoft negotiated with IBM early on and found out what they wanted (access to intellectual property for microcomputers). Microsoft then paid a different company in Seattle for all rights to QDOS, modified the program slightly, licensed it to IBM as PC-DOS, and then later repackaged it as MS-DOS. Microsoft's use of private knowledge to acquire a resource (QDOS) for far less than its actual productive value is a classic example of how economic rents get generated and appropriated under strategic factor market theory. 
- Microsoft generated billions of dollars by using three "competence" factors: (1) its established reputation for leadership in programming languages, which led IBM to contact Microsoft in the first place; (2) Microsoft's private knowledge of IBM's plans and needs; (3) Microsoft's knowledge about where and how to obtain the resource that would fulfill the needs of IBM. 

Sustainable, competitive advantage is usually attributed to firms' control over valuable, rare, nonimitable, and nonsubstitutable resources (Barney 1991). 

So, a competence-based perspective would argue that, without these competencies, Microsoft could not have achieved its extraordinary performance -- no matter how good its governance was, or how bad IBM's governance was. 

keywords
#strategy
#strategy-overview
#intro-to-strategy-helpful
#strategy-theory-helpful
#governance-vs-competence
#microsoft-story
#what-is-strategic-management
#strategic-factor-market-theory



















# from Lieberman "why do firms imitate each other"

Few decisions have outcomes that are fully predictable. Managers take actions, the consequences of which depened on the future state of the environment. At a minimum, most decisions are made under conditions of risk, where the probabilities of environmental states can be estimated but the actual outcome is uncertain (Knight, 1921). Managers often face more severe forms of uncertainty: they may be unable to assign probabilities, they may lack information on cause-effect relationships, and they may be unable to assess the full range of possible outcomes and states (Milliken, 1987). 


keywords
#quote-help
#writing-on-decisions-under-uncertainty
#writing-on-bounded-rationality

























# liu "why do firms fail to engage diversity?"


When untapped resources become known, why don't managers and firms seize on them? Because there are many hurdles.

Cognitive hurdle
- some fail to sense resource X

Experimenting hurlde
- for those that sense resource X, some fail to learn how to experiment with new resources

Reconfiguration hurdles
- for those that sense and seize resource X, some fail to overcome internal resistence to changing routines

Legitimizing hurdles
- for those that sense, seize, and integrate resource X, some fail to justify to stakeholders why the resource is useful

Think Moneyball

Many people claim that Moneyball is a story about new data analytics. Not true. The analytics had been derived centuries earlier. The data on the players already existed. 

Moneyball is a story of overcoming internal barriers to this new resource. The new resource was easy to acquire. What was needed was to overcome all of the company resistence to using the resource.



keywords
#strategy
#behavioral-opportunities
#fail-to-incorporate-advantages
#missed-opportunities
#untapped-potential-strategy











# cronk "design principles for risk-pooling systems"

Discuss the evolutionary foundations of risk-pooling and how it operates in today's commercial insurance.

Discuss seven design principles for effective risk pooling. 

(a) risk pooling basics

risk pooling
- informal social-insurance system to protect against unexpected losses
- a risk transfer system: sharing risk with others
- involves the exchange of a small probability that one might experience a catastrophic loss for the high probability that one will experience small, manageable losses

self-insurance (non-social) policies
- stockpile resources
- avoid risky situations (stay home in pandemic)


(b) evolutionary risk pooling

Our ancestors hunted/gathered with variability (some gathered, some hunted for large game, others form small game) and then brought everything back to the camp. This created a safety net and a mode of specialization. 

Along with innovations such as tool use and the controlled use of fire and language, informal risk pooling in the form of central-place provisioning was one of the key behavioural adaptations that differentiated our ancestors from related species. Rather than foraging primarily on our own and sharing food only occasionally, as our closest nonhuman relatives do, our ancestors developed a system whereby individuals forage separately or in small groups, eating as they go but also bringing any surplus back to camp so that those who were unlucky and those who were too young, old, ill or injured to forage would still have something to eat. The safety net created by central-place provisioning also made it possible for some individuals to focus on high-risk, high-reward foods such as large game, which, when captured, are shared widely. In this way, not only bad outcomes (for example, food shortages) but also good ones
(for example, large game) were pooled. These risk-pooling systems probably also contributed to human life history and fertility patterns, with many individuals in communities helping to subsidize the nutritional needs of children and parents of young children. Evidence from laboratory experiments is consistent with these patterns, whereby people are predisposed to share with others when there is unsynchronized variability in the availability of resources.

(c) 19th century risk pooling & modern risk pooling

Although risk transfer in societies with advanced economies is mostly accomplished through commercial insurance and the state, risk pooling was very important in the recent past and continues to be important in some quarters. For example, fraternal organizations and industrial sickness funds were widespread and important in nineteenth and early twentieth century United States and Britain. Individuals voluntarily joined these organizations and contributed small amounts of money at regular intervals to a fund that then would be available for members who were in need. Such organizations provided services such as sick-leave benefits, health insurance, life insurance, funeral insurance and care of orphans of deceased members.

On the Pacific coast of the United States, fishermen pool their by-catch (that is, fish caught unintentionally that are subject to a government-imposed quota) so that each one can continue fishing as long as possible each season44. Around the world, people form lottery syndicates in which they purchase tickets together and share in any winnings45. In the United States, a for-profit risk-pooling system has been developed by a company called Pando. Pando creates voluntary risk pools among young baseball players and people in other professions whose future fortunes are difficult to predict and then helps enforce those risk pools by monitoring the future income of participants.

(d) seven design principles for risk-pooling systems

1 - participants should perceive that the funds go to those with unpredictable demands

People agree that those who are needy through no fault of their own deserve help, whereas those who are needy as a result of laziness do not.

So, when you create a risk-pooling system, the participants need to know that the funds will be used (and are used) for unpredictable events. 

2 - no obligations to repay / tolerant of imbalances

Strong ethic of sharing without any expectation of repayment.

When a "help system" is created and payment allocations can be scheduled in advance, then people expect reciprocity and repayment. But when needs arise unpredictably, as in the case of illness, injury, or death, then neighbors help with no expectation of anything in return (other than a similar favor if they were ever in dire situations). 

3 - not expected to help others until own needs are met

Airplane safety briefing: secure your own mask first.
People who put their own survival in jeapordy by helping others can generate greater risk for the entire system.

Consider three possible crop-sharing systems
a. no sharing
b. pooling crops without setting aside enogh for each household to meet its needs
c. pooling crops only after securing enough for own household (best)

4 - participants need to agree on what constitutes a "need"

This can be hard when standards of living differ greatly between people. 

5 - resources should be visible

Cheating takes two forms: (a) asking for help when you don't need it, (b) refusing help when you could. It is harder to cheat if needs and what one has to offer are easy to see. 

Pando: US company that creates risk pools among people in occupations. In the case of MLB, contracts of all palyers are public, which makes it impossible to hide income. Pando also creates other risk pools in industries where income is not public knowledge. To prevent cheating by hiding wealth in these industries, they require participants to share their income tax returns. 


6 - allow participants to choose partners

Cooperation is more succesful when individuals can choose who to interact with. Partner choice allows cooperation to be grounded in shared norms, reputation, and trust.


7 - scale of the network should be large enough to cover the scale of risks
 
In an ideal risk pool, the scale of the network is such that individuals are exposed to different kinds of risks and experience them at different times. 

Bollig conducted a livestock census among pastoralist Pokot in western Kenya before, during and after a drought. Although the average herd in his sample shrank during the drought, several of them grew. The topography of East Africa features great altitudinal variations within short distances that help reduce the correlation of shocks among risk-pooling partners. 

Fijian islanders adjust the social and physical distances between themselves and the people they ask for help depending on whether the need is very local or more widespread. When illnesses and injuries occur, people ask those close at hand, such as close kin, but when widespread disasters such as droughts and cyclones strike, they draw on ties to distant kin in other villages where the impact of the disaster may have been less severe.


(e) discussion

Risk pooling and commercial insurance can complement one another.

Unlike commercial insurance, risk pooling does not require actuarial databases that allow companies to calculate the probabilities that specific kinds of people will experience specific kinds of losses28. As a result, grassroots risk-pooling arrangements have an advantage over commercial insurance. That is, while insurance policies are typically limited to very specific types of risk, risk-pooling arrangements can cover a wide range of types of risk, not all of which have to be specified at the outset. This makes risk pooling particularly useful for communities that may experience unexpected and unprecedented events.

Index insurance is tied not to the fortunes of the purchaser but rather to some environmental variable, such as rainfall, that can be independently measured and that is known to correlate with the economic fortunes of the purchasers120,121. In the past two decades, a system called index-based livestock insurance (IBLI)122 has provided Mongolian herders insurance against winter disasters (called dzud in Mongolian) that involve cold temperatures and severe storms that can kill millions of livestock. Payments are made when livestock mortality of a particular species in a district exceeds 5% or 6%. An analysis of recovery of pastoralists after a severe dzud in the winter of 2009–2010 showed that households that purchased IBLI before the dzud recovered faster than uninsured households. 

The airline industry uses a seat-exchange system that allows airlines to buy seats from one another at below-market prices when uncontrollable circumstances such as bad weather and equipment failure require the cancellation of flights. This seat-exchange system is specifically for situations where need arises unpredictably. 


keywords
#risk-pooling
#pando-pooling



























# emich "team composition revisited: a team member attribute approach"

Team Composition approaches:

1) variable-centered

[mean] Do teams with higher team levels of optimism perform better?
[sd] do teams with one highly optimistic member perform better?

2) person-centered

[fau, faultline distance, or latent profile analysis] Do teams composed mostly of one set of attributes (e.g., Class X) perform better than those composed mostly of a different set of attributes (e.g., Class Y)?

3) attribute-alignment

[vector norm] Do teams whose optimistic members are also more assertive perform better than those whose optimistic members are less assertive?


[christopher note]
- put all of these at the within person level
- the study of team composition from a development lens

















# christopher-note; what you need in an OB intro

Always give an employee example.


from Emich "team composition"

This rise in person-centered approaches to team composition has led scholars to develop new theory that considers the pattern of multiple attributes both within and across team members. However, to appropriately operationalize these theoretical arguments, empirical approaches are needed that can simultaneously consider unique levels of these attributes within and across each and every team member. For example, consider the attributes of optimism and assertiveness in Teams 1 and 2 (in Table 1). The most optimistic member in Team 1 is also the least assertive member of the team, whereas the most optimistic member in Team 2 is teh most assertive. Does it matter if a team's most optimistic member is also its most assertive? It seems reasonable to expect that it does since assertive team members often have disproportionate influence with their teammates. Yet, it would be challenging to use existing variable-centered or person-centered approaches to fully address this hypothesis.


from Chen and Ployhart

Thus, prior theory and research have not adequately focused on the dynamic relationship of job satisfaction and turnover intentions. To illustrate the importance of this distinction, consider two
employees in the same organization who have an identical level of job satisfaction (e.g., a rating of 4 on a 5-point scale). Conventional wisdom, based on prior static research, would suggest that the two
employees are equally likely to stay in or leave the organization. But then, what if one employee’s job satisfaction level has increased from 3 to 4, whereas the other employee’s job satisfaction has decreased from 5 to 4? Would “job satisfaction momentum” (i.e., systematic increase or decrease over time) go above and beyond absolute levels of job satisfaction in explaining differences in turnover decisions? Extant turnover theories and research have yet to sufficiently raise or address this question. More refined examination of these dynamic relationships is likely to provide better tests of theory and therefore stronger theoretical and practical implications (Mitchell & James, 2001).



keywords
#how-to-write-ob-intro
#necessary-hook




























# Mayer "the effect of the performance appraisal system on trust for management"

Do employees trust top management more after they implement a new performance management system?

The old performance management system sucked (concerns from focus groups):
- it did not tap into actual performance
- lack of relationship between performance and rewards

In the new system, the supervisor and the employee were required to meet and reconcile their appraisals prior to the supervisor's sub- mission of the evaluation to the company. The major thrust of the new system was to assure that supervisors were discussing specific behaviors and outcomes that were expected of the employees and to make clear that these were the bases of the evaluation.

Greater perceptions of "yes, this performnace management system is accurate" associated with greater trust.

keywords
#performance-management
#mimic-study
#megan-total-tool
#trust-items
#performance-management-items
#survey-items
#use-items
















# Lourenco "monetary incentives, feedback, and recognition"


In a sales environment, feedback doesn't improve performance, but recognition and monetary incentives do.


This study provides experimental evidence from a field setting regarding the effects of monetary incentives, feedback, and recognition on performance measured as sales relative to goals. The results of my field experiment in a retail services company show an increase in performance due to the introduction of monetary incentives and recognition, but no change in performance relative to a control group when only feedback was provided.


operationalization of each:

(1) monetary incentives

Reps earned an extra $10 for meeting the goal, $20 for meeting the stretched goal, and $30 for meeting the super stretched goal.

(2) performance feedback

Reps in the feedback condition received info about sales and the three goals on a by product and by store basis.

(3) recognition

Reps in the recognition condition participated in a special acknowledgement program that awarded certificates -- with no monetary value -- signed by the CEO at the end of the experiment.


The info for conditions 1, 2, or 3 was communicated via email, weekly. "Here is an update of your weekly bonus! Your bonus for the week of XX is YY!"

or

"In the week of XX, you were part of our Gold group of Reps. Congrats! You are part of our most valuable group of Reps."



keywords
#sales-motivation
#use-materials
#materials-embedded
#study-materials
#performance-management
#incentives
#feedback
#recognition
#good-writing









# john sample "mitigating the planning fallacy"



Examples of planning fallacy; how to mitigate the planning fallacy.

Great examples of when predicted "project times" were completely wrong. 

how to mitigate the planning fallacy:

(1) incentives that reward accuracy and encourage realistic forecasts

(2) find similar projects and build a distribution of how long they took. Use to estimate

(3) appoint someone to act as a third-party "friendly pessimist"

This person should blunt creeping optimism; remind the team of obstacles and problems.

(4) unpack the project into many, rather than few, tasks and estimate time for each



keywords
#planning-fallacy
#great-paper





















# tuncel "face threat sensitivity"

Example of a negotiations study

keywords
#negotiations













# mary waller "the temporal phase structure of team interaction"

In complex environments, teams have to waiver between exploration and exploitation, or between searching for information and running with a solution. 

In a MBA simulation (Everest), high performing teams placed more emphasis on the discussion of available information. Their team interactions consisted largely of discussing info, not becoming distracted by premature solution proposals. 

Unlike the low performing teams, if a solution was put forward, high performing teams switched back to info phase. Low performing teams spent lots of time discussion proposed solutions, one after another.

They call this the "solution-fixation trap" 

study
- MBA students complete Everest simulation
- video coded
- information-oriented activities (volunteer info; request info; ask for or give opinion/analysis)
- solution-oriented activities (propose solution; express decision; confirm)

keywords
#team-decisions
#exploration-exploitation
#team-phases
#decision-making
#teams
#team-performance
#solution-fixation-trap











# Lechermeier "how do performance feedback characteristics influence recipients reactions?"

Feedback can stimulate individual performance, but it is very context-dependent. A review of the literature.

[source]
Feedback from self leads to better performance than feedback from supervisor
Source of feedback credibility, expertise, and status influence feedback perceptions

[timing]
Spacing effect matters a lot

[valence (positive or negative)]
People take negative feedback harshly
People much prefer and are more satisfied with positive feedback


keywords
#feedback
#feedback-overview
#main-effects-of-feedback











# fix "hiearchy and the power-law income distribution"


Why are incomes distributed acorrding to a power law?

Simon and others point to rich get richer dynamics. If new money (interest) accrues proportion to current wealth, then over time this wealth accumulates exponentially. 

This guy proposes hierarchy. If people work in firms under hierarchical structures (CEOs in charge of 10 leaders, 10 leaders in charge of 20 employee), then the number of employees at each rank decreases expentially as you move up ranks. 

If you combine above with the notion that pay is greater for those at the top of the hierarchy than it is for those at the bottom of the hierarchy, then the outcome is a power law distribution. 

So, income must be distributed as a power law if we are to operate in a world with firm hierarchies (CEOs, leaders, managers, etc.)

keywords
#income
#power-laws
#economics
#blair-fix
#hierarchy
#simon-reference-and-explain














# Mutz "status threat, not economic hardship, explains the 2016 presidential vote"

She claims to find that trump was elected not because citizens felt "left behind" economically, but because they are racist and feel threatened by their decreasing "white" status. Poor measures. Did not examine "fed up" hypothesis -- just sick of woke talk. 

Timing and spurious causality example. Headlines about racism correlate with trump popularity. That doesn't prove animosity.

Support for Donald J. Trump in the 2016 election was widely attributed to citizens who were “left behind” economically. These claims were based on the strong cross-sectional re- lationship between Trump support and lacking a college edu- cation. Using a representative panel from 2012 to 2016, I find that change in financial wellbeing had little impact on candi- date preference. Instead, changing preferences were related to changes in the party’s positions on issues related to American global dominance and the rise of a majority–minority America: issues that threaten white Americans’ sense of dominant group status.

keywords
#trump-election-study
#economic-hardship
#status-threat
















# downes et al "referents or role models?"

Is it good or bad to perceive the high performance of your peers?
- it depends on your personality

What are the effects of perceiving peers’ higher performance? Social–cognitive theory emphasizes the positive influence that perceiving higher performers can have on observer task and job performance (because observational learning from role models enhances self-efficacy). Social comparison theory emphasizes the negative self-evaluations that accompany perceiving higher performers, which should under many circumstances reduce self-efficacy and subsequent task and job performance. To more fully understand the effects of perceiving higher performance, we argue the effects of perceived higher performers on observer task and job performance depend on individuals’ disposition in how they cognitively process coworkers’ performance. Drawing on goal orientation theory, we suggest individuals with higher levels of performance prove goal orientation (PPGO) primarily interpret perceived higher performers as comparative referents rather than as instructive role models, inhibiting social learning and reducing self-efficacy.


cross sectional study.

keywords
#mimic-study
#performance-management
#peer-social-comparisons
#frog-pond
#small-fish-big-fish























# Doleac "a review of thomas sowell's discrimination and discparities"

summary

His first point is that not all disparities are due to discrimination. He goes on to provide examples of how mis-attributing disparities to discrimination leads to misguided government interventions that actually make things worse, increasing disparities where they’d intended to shrink them. His conclusion is, essentially, that we should stop trying to intervene in markets we don’t fully understand, and allow the invisible hand of market forces to reduce disparities to efficient levels in the long run.

differentiating people

Discrimination 1a is sorting individuals accurately based on relevant characteristics. That is, decisions are made based on qualifications such as education or work history. Racial disparities in economic outcomes are thus driven by racial disparities perfectly correlated with those observable characteristics.

Discrimination 1b is sorting individuals based on group averages; this is what economists call ‘statistical discrimination.’ This type of discrimination is used when gathering enough information on an individual’s relevant characteristics – to rely on Discrimination 1a instead – is more costly or even impossible.

Finally, Discrimination 2 is what economists refer to as ‘taste-based discrimination’ or ‘animus.’ It occurs when decision-makers care about race itself, not race as a proxy for something else. Economists typically model this as a cost incurred by the decision-maker when they interact with a person of color: they derive negative utility from such an interaction.

her critique

I also found it strange and misleading that Sowell does not engage at all with the large and ever-growing economic literature on whether people are treated differently due to their race. There is plenty of rigorous evidence that Discrimination 1b and 2 (statistical discrimination adn animus) exist and are pervasive (cites audit studies; but also cites Heckman).

As in other contexts, it is not obvious a priori that existing disparities are due to dis- crimination within the economics profession – they might be due to pre-existing differences in training or broader social norms that shape career preferences. However, there is rapidly- accumulating evidence that current norms and practices in the economics profession result in biased treatment of women and other underrepresented groups (Lundberg and Stearns, 2019). It is straightforward to see how these biases can contribute to persistent and inefficient disparities that market forces alone will not shrink. Several studies show that women are held to a higher standard in academic publishing. Papers by female authors in top journals are cited more often than similar papers by men, suggesting that they are more meaningful contributions to their literatures (Grossbard, Yilmazer and Zhang, 2018; Hengel and Moon, 2020; Card et al., 2020). It appears that referees and editors push female authors to write more clearly than male authors in order to convey and defend their ideas – consistent with their being less likely to give female authors the benefit of the doubt when writing is unclear (Hengel, 2020). Even after papers are published, women may not get equal credit for their work. Sarsons (2017) finds that while sole-authored work increases the likelihood of tenure and promotion equally for men and women, coauthored work benefits men more than women (that is, women systematically get less credit for coauthored work, particularly when the work is coauthored with men). Student evaluations of teaching are often considered when setting pay and determining promotion, and there is now extensive evidence that such evaluations are biased against female professors (MacNeil, Driscoll and Hunt, 2015; Boring, 2017; Mitchell and Martin, 2018; Mengel, Sauermann and Z ̈olitz, 2019). Recent work has also shown that women are more likely to be tapped for low-promotability tasks (think departmental service) than men are (Babcock et al., 2017; Babcock, Recalde and Vesterlund, 2017).

Sowell writing she agrees with: interventions often backfire

Policies that target one source of disparity when another was at work can be ineffective at best, and have important unintended consequences at worst. For instance, Ban the Box (BTB) policies prohibit employers from asking a job applicant about their criminal record until late in the hiring process. Employers can still run a background check before hiring the person, but then are often required to justify a decision not to hire that applicant if their criminal record is worrisome. The goals are (1) to allow more people with records to get their foot in the door, possibly allowing them to build rapport with and signal their work-readiness to an employer during an interview, and (2) to increase the costs associated with not hiring someone because of their criminal record.

Once threatened with these additional costs, employers may simply try to guess which applicants have a recent criminal conviction that would concern them, and avoid even inter- viewing those people. Though they can no longer see that information up front, they may try to infer it from the remaining characteristics they can see — such as age, sex, race, and education. They would then statistically discriminate against groups that are more likely to have a recent conviction, such as young men of color who don’t have a college degree. In Sowell’s terms, they may engage in Discrimination 1b against applicants from this group — a much larger group than suffered from discrimination before. This harms young, low-skilled black and Hispanic men who don’t have a criminal record. They were able to easily signal their clean record to employers before BTB, but now cannot. This reduces their rate of callbacks and employment.

Sowell cites research showing that employers’ access to criminal records was associated with increased hiring of black men (Holzer, Raphael and Stoll, 2006); this suggests that sta- tistical discrimination based on race is used in the absence of criminal record information. More recent research shows that – as economic theory predicts – BTB made this problem worse: when employers cannot ask about criminal records, they increase statistical discrim- ination based on race, and net employment of young, low-skilled, black men falls (Agan and Starr, 2018; Doleac and Hansen, 2018). Other recent research shows that BTB is not help- ing people with records get jobs (see for example, Rose, 2017, and Jackson and Zhao, 2017), likely because the policy does not address the reasons for employers’ initial reluctance to hire people from this group.3 (These candidates can still be rejected when their criminal record is checked at the end of the hiring process.) Two studies find that BTB increases crime and recidivism among black and Hispanic men, presumably because the policy makes it more difficult for them to find work (Sabia et al., 2019; Sherrard, 2020). There is also evidence that BTB incentivizes some applicants without records to get an occupational license that is off-limits to people with certain convictions, as a way to “buy back the box” that legislators banned (Blair and Chung, 2018; Marchingiglio, 2019). 


keywords
#sowell-review
#interventions-backfire
#unintended-consequences






 





# behavioral theory of the firm (BTOF), aspiration, performance, and risk

Researchers in the behavioral theory of the firm (BTOF) have long examined firms’ risk-taking behavior as a response to performance feedback (Argote & Greve, 2007; Bromiley, 1991; Cyert & March, 1963; Ref & Shapira, 2017). Accord- ing to the BTOF, decision-makers use a particular aspiration level as a reference point to evaluate performance. When performance falls below the aspiration level, the firm is motivated to initiate problemistic search for solutions, and it becomes increasingly risk prone. When performance rises above the aspiration level, the firm has excess re- source capacity to start slack search and again be- comes risk-seeking (Cyert & March, 1963; Levinthal & March, 1981; March, 1988; March & Shapira, 1987). 


keywords
#firm-risk
#firm-performance
#strategy
#behavioral-theory-of-the-firm
#aspiration-levels
#discrepancy















# xu "deviant versus aspirational risk taking"

keywords
#bad-writing


















# Kuncel "decoy effects improve diversity hiring"

Decoy effects in diversity hiring.

study 3 attributes of 3 candidates
- organizational skills (1-10)
- knows the business (1-10)
- diverse candidate (yes/no)

"Your organization is attempting to hire a new project manager. You have been given the goal of making a good hire. Your boss wants you to: increase the racial and ethnic diversity of your team over time [and] hire a candidate who knows the business and has good organizational skills."

DV: hire or not hire the diverse candidate

When 3, equal-attribute candidates exist (2 not diversity and 1 diverity), then people hire evenly across the board.

When a 4th, diverse candidate is added with lower attributes, then people are more likely to hire the original, equally-qualified candidate

keywords
#decoy-effects
#diversity-hiring
#vignette-study





















# Dahlke & Wiernik "not restricted to selection research: accounting for indirect range"

Wiernik range restriction tutorial.

keywords
#range-restriction
#psychometrics
#measurement


















# Knudsen "coordinated exploration: organizing joint search"

agent-based-model takeaway
- 64x64 grid: one agent searches along the row (windmill materials), the other agent searches along the column (windmill aerodynamics). The cell provides the payoff. Agents start with only a limited view of the full grid. 

content takeaway

People and firms have to balance exploration and exploitation to identify peaks. 

But we now live in a world with coordinated exploration: a search undertaken by multiple actors who need to coordinate their efforts.

Whereas each specialist is responsible for search in their own domain, their payoffs are dependent on the choices of other specialists. 

As soon as the environment becomes too complex for a single individual to comprehend, organizations take advantage of the economies of specialization offered by division of labor. However, division of labor is accompanied by the need for integration.

search: the specialist problem of searching for new valuable alternatives
coordination: the problem of choosing an alternative from a particular domain such that it is jointly attractive to all agents, though it may not be optimal for any one of them.

[christopher note]
- search and coordination are important, but the theory is missing action, or execution. Yes, you have to choose an alternative, but then more problems arise from acting on those choices. 

keywords
#coordination
#collective-action
#agent-based-model
#administrative-science-quarterly-abm
#exploration-exploitation-weakness



















# der Rijt "contextual antecedents of informal feedback in the workplace"

Greater psychological safety is associated with more informal feedback-seeking


keywords
#feedback-seeking
#psych-safety









# colquitt "content validation guidelines"

keywords
#content-validity














# cheng "challenging diversity training myths"

A challenge to "diversity stuff doesn't work"

So many straw men in this paper. 

"It isn't always bad" is basically the entire framing of the paper.

keywords
#woke
#diversity-training
#diversity-training-myths
















# dehlke & sackett "on the assessment of predictive bias"

keywords
#psychometrics-simulation
#selection
#measurement
#psychometrics
#predictive-bias
#college-admissions








# arnold "explaining altruism"

A great demonstration of how to simulate evolution of cooperation paradigms.

ARNEAA-4v1.pdf

keywords
#evolution-of-cooperation-simulation
#cooperation-simulation-demonstration
#abm-cooperation-example















############## academy of management journal


# Luciano et al., "The double edged sword of leadership task transitions"

Multi-team systems use complex hierarchies to navigate complex, changing environments. In such environments, is it better for roles to remain rigid (e.g., the leader handles leader task A, the follower handles follower task B) or allow for flexibility?

Good to switch: If people are allowed flexibility, then switches quickly alleviate environment pressures
Bad to switch: If people are allowed flexibility, then switches hurt routines and cycles


keywords
#multi-team-systems




# Soda "Networks, creativity, and time"

Organizations rely on employees to maintain a sustained flow of creative ideas. How are individual's able to stay creative over time?

Continually add new ties to your network. Continually talk to new people about new ideas.

keywords
#creativity
#networks




# Bain et al., "amplifying voice in organizations"

Voice is important. But it often isn't allowed to create its full potential because managers suck for X and Y reasons. How can orgs mitigate this problem? Meetings often happen in social settings. We introduce the behavior of peer amplification: public endoresement of another person's contribution...this can boost the probability that voicing suggestions are heard, acknowledged, respected, and implemented. 

keywords
#voice



# Dyer "who should become a business school associate dean?"


Firms generally want the best people to take on increasingly advanced, firm-relevant roles. Unfortunately, the best performing people often don't want these positions. 

Method
- professors with super high research productivity are less likely to become deans than low performers

Unanswered questions
- why don't they want the roles?
- moderators: the extent to which the firm relevant "higher" position offers greater autonomy


keywords
#best-paper
#firm-performance
#human-capital-dillemma
#moving-up-dilemma
#charlie-dillema




# He et al., "when does pay for performance motivate employee helping behavior?"

Good example of boring but publishable AMJ writing. Prior consensus. Moderator creates dilemma. Moderator provides insight about "when and why" something happens. Psychological mediators or mechanisms. 

Pay for performance is believed to increase in-role performance but reduce helping behavior. This study demonstrates that PFP sometimes improves helping behavior -- it depends on whether performance is subjectively or objectively evaluated (manger ratings or objective indicators). 


keywords
#publishable-bs
#academese
#publishable-garbage
#helping-behaviors



# DesJardine "how temporal focus shapes the influence of executive compensation on risk taking"


Executives are often risk averse with current wealth but risk seeking with prospective wealth. 

This idea assumes that all people share the same temporal focus. Some CEOs, by the nature of their work or individual differences, are always forward looking. Those employees are risk averse with prospective wealth.


keywords
#best-paper
#risk-taking
#wealth
#CEO-perceptions





# Sessions, "Do the hustle! Effects of side-hustles on full-time work performance"

Most think that side hustles take prescious time away from core work. We show that side hustles have an empowering, spill-over effect. 

Demonstrate affective and cognitive pathways. Side hustle => positive affect => core work performance (but really they stop at affect...they don't look at work performance)

#publishable-bs






# Baer et al. "undertrusted, overtrusted, or just right?"

Most think trust is a good thing. "The prevailing assumption is"

Too much trust is bad, as is too little trust. When trust received exceeds or falls short of an employee's desire for trust, the employee should perceive the supervisor as less fair.

Once again, they act as if all of this is so important for performance...but their model is trust => fairness perception.


keywords
#publishable-bs



# eldor "leading by doing"

Leading by example => subordinate engagement => subordinate service quality.


keywords
#lead-by-example
#performance
#leadership






# Taeuscher "gaining legitimacy by being different"

Trade off in creating something new: you have to be distinctive, but you don't want to be so different that it undermines your legitimacy.






# Sherf "distinguishing voice and silence at work"

Voice and silence are different constructs. 

They use a meta-analysis as their "study 1." Interesting.

Study 1, 2, and 3 don't have to be [lab, lab, field.] They could be [MA, study, simulation]. 










# Zipay, "Lenient reactions to misconduct

When a coworker engages in misconduct, are you lenient or harsh? People differ in their leniency.





# Campbell "Employer-Employee matching and copmlementary assets"


Successful cross-org collaborations (i published a paper with scientist at different university) relate to my decision to move to the institution with which I am collaborating






# Mtahieu, "Deploying human capital resources..."

keywords
#want-to-read
https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/10.5465/amj.2019.0500







# Alterman et al., "Best not to know"

We know that orgs with below-market pay have a hard time retaining employees. 

We don't know how pay secrecy practices relate to turnover.
- i.e., transparency of pay; whether employees can disclose pay to one another

keywords
#compensation
#pay-for-performance
#incentives





# Schaubroeck "struggling to meet the bar" 2021

Failing to make progress on a desired occupational benchmark (test, physical fitness exam, promotion) limits one's capacity to engage in informal leadership.

Argument:
- Informal leadership is important
- we don't know situational factors that influence informal leadership
- growing literature on events...we predict that events are relevant for informal leadership behaviors






# Myers, "performance benefits of reciprocal vicarious learning"

We know that vicarious learning is important (learning from others).
He shows that reciprocity in vicarious learning is also relevant for team performance. I show you. You show me. Etc.

keywords
- reciprocity of learning
- team performance

#reciprocity-of-learning
#team-learning
#team-performance
#learn-by-doing
#learn-by-doing-teams





# Shim "the impact of leader eye gaze on disparity in member influence"

Teamwork is great because you can integrate diverse knowledge. Unfortunately, superficial demographic attributes sometimes create status differences and reduce the diversity bonus. 

Shim shows that leaders can re-create the diversity bonus by gazing at low status members of the group.






# Shin "when putting work off pays off"

Although it is widely assumed that procrastination is counterproductive, delaying task progress may have hidden benefits for creativity. Drawing on theories of incubation, we propose that moderate procrastination can foster creativity when employees have the intrinsic motivation and opportunity to generate new ideas.

keywords
- creativity
- performance
- rumination
- easy study mimic
- publishable garbage

#publishable-bs
#rumination
#creativity






# Kuhnel, "there is a time to be creative"

Chronotype: setting of your biological clock: sleep habits and preferred diurnal activity. It informs when you can be most creative.



keywords
- neuroscience

keywords
#neuroscience






# Richard "the effects of racial diversity congruence"

We examine whether matching levels of racial diversity in upper management and lower management (i.e., racial diversity congruence) impact firm productivity


keywords
- diversity delusion


#diversity-delusion
#woke






# Guo "the impact of executive verbal communication"

Executives make their investors converge and agree by speaking outwardly with simple language.

keywords
- writing well

#on-writing-well
#executive-clarity








# Troster "when victims help their abusive supervisors"

Victims of abuse sometimes feel guity and then help their abusors at even greater levels. 


Studies on abusive supervision typically posit that targets of abuse will either directly blame the perpetrating supervisor or indirectly blame the organization for allowing the abuse, and as a result reduce their cooperativeness at work. We pivot from this predominant logic and argue that, under certain circumstances, targets of abusive supervision may blame themselves, feel guilty, and then try to make it up to their abusive supervisors by helping them more. 






# Cunningham "seeing oneself as a valued contributor"

How do you ensure team members offer their unique perspectives so that teams can achieve the diversity bonus?

keywords
- cool paper


#great-paper









# Methot "office chit chat"

Small talk morning => positive emotions afternoon => ocbs end of workday

keywords
- within person but not dynamic



# Keller "in with the old?"

Given how often employees change careers and move, many orgs end up hiring former, old employees. 

These "boomerang" employees often out-perform new hires because they already have a clear sense of how to coordinate their actions. 


keywords
- performance
- cool study

#great-paper
#performance
#boomerang-employees










# gielnik "a dynamic account of self-efficacy in entrepreneurship"

The example I use for between-within distinction

keywords
#within-between
#dynamic-self-efficacy
#selection-development
#error-between-within









# Fichman, "Explanatory theory and explaining variance"

Variance explanations do not necessarily provide good explanations of causal mechanisms. 

Statistical modeling is about identifying variation among units, then incorporating predictors to account for that variance.

Consider bodies falling downward. If they are of different weight and texture, then we would observe variability in their falling time. We might try to explain falling time by incorporating weight and texture. No where in our explanation is gravity.

We try to identify variation and then partition it. We should be looking for mechanisms and then observing that deviations from that mechanism are just stochastics. 

keywords
- philosophy of modeling
- statistics
- models
- theory





# Eliav "humor and creativity"

Types of humor.
Box and arrows between humor and creativity.

Not what I care about. I care about humor as a means of making people feel cohesive. Making people feel like they can speak their minds. 



keywords
- humor











# Neumark & Wascher, 2006 "Minimum wage and employment: a review"

Although the evidence is mixed, the vast majority of studies indicate a negative effect of minimum wages on employment. Two other conclusions emerge from our review. Few studies, if any, provide convincing evidence of positive employment effects of minimum wages. Second, there are strong negative effects of minimum wage among studies that focus on the least-skilled groups. 


keywords
#minimum-wage
#economics










# Neumark, "Age discrimination in hiring"

http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/early/2021/08/31/jhr.0420-10831R1.abstract

In one, age is revealed simultaneously with other applicant information; job offer rates are much lower for older than for younger job applicants. In the second, interview selections are based on detailed, age-blind on-line applications, while subsequent interviews are not age-blind; older applicants are not under-selected for interviews, but face a lower job offer rate after in-person interviews. The combined evidence is consistent with age discrimination.


keywords
#selection
#hiring
#age-discrimination
#audit-study







# Cappelli & Neumark, "Do high performance work practices improve establishment outcomes?"

Our results suggest that work practices that transfer power to employees, often described as “high performance” practices, may rise productivity, although the statistical case is weak. However, we also find that these work practices on average raise labor costs per employee. The net result is no apparent effect on efficiency, a measure that combines labor costs and labor productivity. 

GREAT INTRO ON WHY IO PSCHOLOGISTS THINK PSYCH IN THE WORKPLACE IS NECESSARY

...share the view that mass production systems sharply limit the control and decision-making autonomy of employees, ignoring important psychological and social needs of employees in the process. As a result, they not only fail to tap important sources of motivation and ideas from employees but in many cases cause employees to withhold effort and compliance with management directions. 

Results
- high performance practices have small effects on employee performance (sales)
- high perf practices have large effects on labor costs (compesation per employee)
- so, hpp raise wages but don't really help employee productivity



keywords
#human-resources
#economics
#labor-relations
#organizational-performance
#motivation
#best-paper
#disprove-fad










# Neumark & Button, "Is it harder for older workers to find jobs?"

Good description of age discrimination.

keywords
#economics
#audit-study
#age-discrimination




# Lordan & Neumark, 2018 "People versus machines"

We study the effect of minimum wage increases on employment in automatable jobs – jobs in
which employers may find it easier to substitute machines for people – focusing on low skilled workers for whom such substitution may be spurred by minimum wage increases. Based on CPS data from 1980-2015, we find that increasing the minimum wage decreases significantly the share of automatable employment held by low-skilled workers, and increases the likelihood that lowskilled workers in automatable jobs become nonemployed or employed in worse jobs. The average effects mask significant heterogeneity by industry and demographic group, including substantive adverse effects for older, low-skilled workers in manufacturing. We also find some evidence that the same changes improve job opportunities for higher-skilled workers.




keywords
#economics
#automation
#minimum-wage
#future-of-work






# Neumark, "women helping women? role-model and mentoring effects"

One potential method to increase the success of female graduate students in economics may be to encourage mentoring relationships between these students and female faculty members. Increased hiring of female faculty is viewed as one way to promote such mentoring relationships, perhaps because of role-model effects. A more direct method of promoting such relationships may be for female graduate students to have female faculty serve as dissertation chairs. The evidence in this paper addresses the question of whether either of these strategies results in more successful outcomes for female graduate students. 

The evidence provides no support for the hypothesis that outcomes for female graduate students are improved by adding female faculty members, or by having a female dissertation chair.

keywords
#mentoring
#diversity
#match-demographics
#female-female-mentoring
#economics
#anti-woke
#failure-to-replicate
#prove-wrong
#disprove-fad






# why we don't use trigger warnings

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZFyl8wmKqg

why shouldn't you use trigger warnings?
- trigger warnings do not improve student's mental health
- they lead faculty to avoid important topics

17 studies show that TW don't alleviate emotional distress (among people with and without trauma). 

Trigger warnings lead people to think that trauma is the most central aspect of their life. 

It promotes the idea that students are fragile. It causes the students to be hypervigilant about any material that might be stressful.


keywords
#trigger-warnings
#anti-woke
#unintended-consequences
























# campenni "need-based transfers enhance resilience to shocks"

An agent-based model of risk-pooling.

An example of uncorrelated shocks:
- osotua establish partnerships (food sharing) with people in different ecological zones so that their risk profiles are complementary. 

The questions that this ABM addresses:

1. agents following a need-based transfer rule will survive longer than agents following a debt-based transfer rule
- need: ask for help if current holdings are below the asking threshold (64). give help, but not more than what would put you below the giving threshold (64).
- debt: keep track of who you owe and who owes you. Agents transfer but only if they are asked by others who are in good standing. Transfer amount you can without going below sustainability threshold (64). If you go five rounds without transferring a repayment, you dafault into bad standing (and people subsequently don't loan you). 

2. agents in larger networks will survive longer than angents in smaller networks

3. agents in modular networks will survive longer than agents in less modular networks

4. agents that experience shocks that are less correlated temporally with shocks exprienced by other agents in their networks will survive longer than agents that experience shocks that are temporally correlated. 

ABM summary

Initial herd of 70 grows or shrinks during each time step of the simulation at a rate normally distributed around a mean of 3.4%. The minimum viable herd size is 64 (if below 64 for two steps, you die). 

During each step, people ask and provide help to one another. 

During each step, there is also a chance of a loss (through drought or a disease spreading in the herd), and the probability that a loss is correlated (it affects all households at the same time) ranged from 0 to 1. 



keywords
#risk-pooling
#abm
#agent-based-modeling








# Beltran "what is reciprocity?"

Scholars differ widely in opinion on what they believe is true reciprocity.

Many state that unconditional helping (helping without expecting repayment) is not reciprocity.

keywords
#reciprocity-definitions
#reciprocity-review
#cooperation
#ocbs
#helping-behaviors










# burt "cooperation beyond the network"

Networks operate as a forcing function for cooperation.

Closed network
- project team with members of similar background. They are closed. Team members discuss new ideas as right or wrong depending on idea fit with views held in common within the team

Open network
- project team with diverse people who have never worked together. Over time, these people develop skills that facilitate communication with people who see things differently.

The more closed a network is around a person, the less likely he will cooperate with a stranger.

The negative association between closure and cooperation is especially strong for successful people. 

keywords
#cooperation
#networks
#networks-as-forcing-cooperation






# Elon expects overwork

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxQynmkcxpg

My dad worked in a competing company who also built rockets, and he would get a lot of resumes from SpaceX engineers. When he'd interview them he'd ask why they are leaving such a great company and almost every single person told him, "Elon works 16-20 hours a day 7 days a week and sleeps in his office as he has no time for his family or anything else.  And the issue is he wants his engineers to work the same. They have a MASSIVE burn out problem over there. If you want to work at SpaceX, be prepared to leave your family because SpaceX is now your entire life and I want to be able to see my family more."


keywords
#elon-burnout
#musk-burnout
#leader-too-high-expectations







# baker "stock market responses to unethical behavior"

Do individual-level unethical behaviors negatively influence firm-level stocks?

IV: coded negative events from newspapers. Using that event, have raters evaluate (1 to 7 scale)
- unethicalness of the behavior within the event
- whether the event represented an indiviudal or org

DV: stock price (sum stock price day before, day of, and day after event)
- CAR (cumulative abnormal return)

stock price (sum) ~ unethical event

robustness check
- We created 10 new CAR measures using randomly generated dates and then reran these 10
models. All of the interaction terms testing our hypotheses for these alternative models (i.e., models predicting abnormal returns on random dates) were nonsignificant, with p values ranging from 0.12 to 0.98

keywords
#stock-as-dv
#use-this-dv
#mimic-study
#strategy-ob








# pranav dissertation responses to computational modeling


DON'T SAY PROOF OF CONCEPT.

SAY DEMONSTRATION OF WHAT IF
- DEMONSTRATION OF SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS
- DOES THE LOGIC GENERATE THE OUTCOME?
- IS THE LOGIC SOUND?
- goal of the simulation is to generate ideas
- goal of the simulation is to signal where reasoning is obscure or doesn't make sense
- "everyone thinks X" I am using a simulation to show "it could be this other thing"


WHAT IS THE BENEFIT OF BRINGING SYSTEMS DYNAMICS TO OB?
- raising questions. ask new questions.
- challenging assumptions
- generate theory
- OB theory is not good at emergence. Systems dynamics is good at emergence. So, it provides a toolkit for looking at emergence

keywords
#pranav-dissertation-responses
#why-model
#why-comp-model









# cronk "design principles for risk-pooling systems"

Discuss the evolutionary foundations of risk-pooling and how it operates in today's commercial insurance.

ideas
- need-based transfer system vs above threshold transfer system

Discuss seven design principles for effective risk pooling. 

(a) risk pooling basics

risk pooling
- informal social-insurance system to protect against unexpected losses
- a risk transfer system: sharing risk with others
- involves the exchange of a small probability that one might experience a catastrophic loss for the high probability that one will experience small, manageable losses

self-insurance (non-social) policies
- stockpile resources
- avoid risky situations (stay home in pandemic)


(b) evolutionary risk pooling

Our ancestors hunted/gathered with variability (some gathered, some hunted for large game, others form small game) and then brought everything back to the camp. This created a safety net and a mode of specialization. 

Along with innovations such as tool use and the controlled use of fire and language, informal risk pooling in the form of central-place provisioning was one of the key behavioural adaptations that differentiated our ancestors from related species. Rather than foraging primarily on our own and sharing food only occasionally, as our closest nonhuman relatives do, our ancestors developed a system whereby individuals forage separately or in small groups, eating as they go but also bringing any surplus back to camp so that those who were unlucky and those who were too young, old, ill or injured to forage would still have something to eat. The safety net created by central-place provisioning also made it possible for some individuals to focus on high-risk, high-reward foods such as large game, which, when captured, are shared widely. In this way, not only bad outcomes (for example, food shortages) but also good ones
(for example, large game) were pooled. These risk-pooling systems probably also contributed to human life history and fertility patterns, with many individuals in communities helping to subsidize the nutritional needs of children and parents of young children. Evidence from laboratory experiments is consistent with these patterns, whereby people are predisposed to share with others when there is unsynchronized variability in the availability of resources.

(c) 19th century risk pooling & modern risk pooling

Although risk transfer in societies with advanced economies is mostly accomplished through commercial insurance and the state, risk pooling was very important in the recent past and continues to be important in some quarters. For example, fraternal organizations and industrial sickness funds were widespread and important in nineteenth and early twentieth century United States and Britain. Individuals voluntarily joined these organizations and contributed small amounts of money at regular intervals to a fund that then would be available for members who were in need. Such organizations provided services such as sick-leave benefits, health insurance, life insurance, funeral insurance and care of orphans of deceased members.

On the Pacific coast of the United States, fishermen pool their by-catch (that is, fish caught unintentionally that are subject to a government-imposed quota) so that each one can continue fishing as long as possible each season44. Around the world, people form lottery syndicates in which they purchase tickets together and share in any winnings45. In the United States, a for-profit risk-pooling system has been developed by a company called Pando. Pando creates voluntary risk pools among young baseball players and people in other professions whose future fortunes are difficult to predict and then helps enforce those risk pools by monitoring the future income of participants.

(d) seven design principles for risk-pooling systems

1 - participants should perceive that the funds go to those with unpredictable demands

People agree that those who are needy through no fault of their own deserve help, whereas those who are needy as a result of laziness do not.

So, when you create a risk-pooling system, the participants need to know that the funds will be used (and are used) for unpredictable events. 

2 - no obligations to repay / tolerant of imbalances

Strong ethic of sharing without any expectation of repayment.

When a "help system" is created and payment allocations can be scheduled in advance, then people expect reciprocity and repayment. But when needs arise unpredictably, as in the case of illness, injury, or death, then neighbors help with no expectation of anything in return (other than a similar favor if they were ever in dire situations). 

3 - not expected to help others until own needs are met

Airplane safety briefing: secure your own mask first.
People who put their own survival in jeapordy by helping others can generate greater risk for the entire system.

Consider three possible crop-sharing systems
a. no sharing
b. pooling crops without setting aside enogh for each household to meet its needs
c. pooling crops only after securing enough for own household (best)

4 - participants need to agree on what constitutes a "need"

This can be hard when standards of living differ greatly between people. 

5 - resources should be visible

Cheating takes two forms: (a) asking for help when you don't need it, (b) refusing help when you could. It is harder to cheat if needs and what one has to offer are easy to see. 

Pando: US company that creates risk pools among people in occupations. In the case of MLB, contracts of all palyers are public, which makes it impossible to hide income. Pando also creates other risk pools in industries where income is not public knowledge. To prevent cheating by hiding wealth in these industries, they require participants to share their income tax returns. 


6 - allow participants to choose partners

Cooperation is more succesful when individuals can choose who to interact with. Partner choice allows cooperation to be grounded in shared norms, reputation, and trust.


7 - scale of the network should be large enough to cover the scale of risks
 
In an ideal risk pool, the scale of the network is such that individuals are exposed to different kinds of risks and experience them at different times. 

Bollig conducted a livestock census among pastoralist Pokot in western Kenya before, during and after a drought. Although the average herd in his sample shrank during the drought, several of them grew. The topography of East Africa features great altitudinal variations within short distances that help reduce the correlation of shocks among risk-pooling partners. 

Fijian islanders adjust the social and physical distances between themselves and the people they ask for help depending on whether the need is very local or more widespread. When illnesses and injuries occur, people ask those close at hand, such as close kin, but when widespread disasters such as droughts and cyclones strike, they draw on ties to distant kin in other villages where the impact of the disaster may have been less severe.


(e) discussion

Risk pooling and commercial insurance can complement one another.

Unlike commercial insurance, risk pooling does not require actuarial databases that allow companies to calculate the probabilities that specific kinds of people will experience specific kinds of losses28. As a result, grassroots risk-pooling arrangements have an advantage over commercial insurance. That is, while insurance policies are typically limited to very specific types of risk, risk-pooling arrangements can cover a wide range of types of risk, not all of which have to be specified at the outset. This makes risk pooling particularly useful for communities that may experience unexpected and unprecedented events.

Index insurance is tied not to the fortunes of the purchaser but rather to some environmental variable, such as rainfall, that can be independently measured and that is known to correlate with the economic fortunes of the purchasers120,121. In the past two decades, a system called index-based livestock insurance (IBLI)122 has provided Mongolian herders insurance against winter disasters (called dzud in Mongolian) that involve cold temperatures and severe storms that can kill millions of livestock. Payments are made when livestock mortality of a particular species in a district exceeds 5% or 6%. An analysis of recovery of pastoralists after a severe dzud in the winter of 2009–2010 showed that households that purchased IBLI before the dzud recovered faster than uninsured households. 

The airline industry uses a seat-exchange system that allows airlines to buy seats from one another at below-market prices when uncontrollable circumstances such as bad weather and equipment failure require the cancellation of flights. This seat-exchange system is specifically for situations where need arises unpredictably. 


keywords
#risk-pooling
#pando-pooling








# campenni "need-based transfers enhance resilience to shocks"

An agent-based model of risk-pooling.

An example of uncorrelated shocks:
- osotua establish partnerships (food sharing) with people in different ecological zones so that their risk profiles are complementary. 

The questions that this ABM addresses:

1. agents following a need-based transfer rule will survive longer than agents following a debt-based transfer rule
- need: ask for help if current holdings are below the asking threshold (64). give help, but not more than what would put you below the giving threshold (64).
- debt: keep track of who you owe and who owes you. Agents transfer but only if they are asked by others who are in good standing. Transfer amount you can without going below sustainability threshold (64). If you go five rounds without transferring a repayment, you dafault into bad standing (and people subsequently don't loan you). 

2. agents in larger networks will survive longer than angents in smaller networks

3. agents in modular networks will survive longer than agents in less modular networks

4. agents that experience shocks that are less correlated temporally with shocks exprienced by other agents in their networks will survive longer than agents that experience shocks that are temporally correlated. 

ABM summary

Initial herd of 70 grows or shrinks during each time step of the simulation at a rate normally distributed around a mean of 3.4%. The minimum viable herd size is 64 (if below 64 for two steps, you die). 

During each step, people ask and provide help to one another. 

During each step, there is also a chance of a loss (through drought or a disease spreading in the herd), and the probability that a loss is correlated (it affects all households at the same time) ranged from 0 to 1. 



keywords
#risk-pooling
#abm
#agent-based-modeling











# kauer "reducing bycatch through a risk pool"

Risk pooling among fisheries.

General benefits language for risk pooling. 

Fishery cooperatives form when a group of fishermen, vessel, or quota share owners agree to share resources, abide by rules, enforcement mechanisms, and collectively manage some aspect of a fishery [16,17]. These types of voluntary agreements can facilitate coordination and change behaviors or practices to improve economic efficiency, enhance enforcement and compliance, and increase local stewardship [6,14,16–18]. 

keywords
#risk-pooling-fisheries







# ghauri "why do SMEs join co-operatives?"

Why do small-business owners join co-peratives? They interview business owners and find the following reasons. Economic benefits, business support, knowledge, and networking. 

Why do people opt in?

keywords
#risk-pooling
#why-opt-in-risk-pooling








# Piasecki "the influence of employee membership on training intensity"

When peeople are embedded in a co-perative with their employer, they are more likely to participate in training due to social exchange: a sense of obligation to a local institution.









# levantesi "mutual peer-to-peer insurance"

People pursue peer-to-peer sharing for insurance rather than traditional companies for both economic and social reasons. 

Examples of peer-to-peer insurance programs. 

Due to the cost of sol- vency capital, profit margins and fees, the insurance premiums are often significantly higher than the expected value of benefits. Moreover, the moral hazard, typical of traditional schemes, further raises premiums. Also, often high-risk individuals do not find insurance coverage, as in the case of health policies that do not include previous illnesses. Other reasons can push a group of peers to self-insurance. Not to be ignored is the social aspect (Lucas, 2017): the sense of belonging to a community and the pursuit of social objectives is influencing investment choices in the broadest sense of the term. At the same time, an attitude of mistrust towards the insurance sector is rampant, because usually the insurance pricing and the compensation mechanism for claims are perceived as unclear and inaccessible by average people (Abdikerimova & Feng, 2020). Instead, P2P focuses on the clarity of the cooperation rules to pursue the fundamental principle of mutuality at the origin of insurance.

Finally, Braun and Schreiber (2017) provide a list of the main rea- sons behind the participation of individuals in P2P insurance: opportu- nities for monetary rewards and gains, cost-saving, sense of community, the feeling of being treated fairly, opportunity to build up a network of strangers, not family and friends.

The first type of self-organizing P2P was launched in China in 2015 with TongJuBao, a match-maker for peers who self organize themselves, self-regulate, share risk and manage all insurance functions without any intermediation; every decision is made through a voting procedure. The groups are created by the digital platform based on common affinity or interests. People are grouped according to the type of insurance (life, health, car), social status, profession, region of residence, family composition, and other characteristics to form homogeneous risk groups. Digital decentralization allows access to the network to a large number of people with different origins, who often do not know each other and this guarantees the independence of any claims.



keywords
#risk-pooling
#peer-to-peer-insurance







# Claessens "need-based transfer systems are more vulnerable to cheating when resources are hidden"

Good writing on why people need risk-pooling. 

Study showing that when resources (e.g., money, hunted food) are hidden, people are more likely to request help when not actually in need and (b) not fulfill requests for help even when they had sufficient resources to do so.

Humans often inhabit unpredictable, volatile environments. In such risky environments, people are vulnerable to such unforeseen events as earthquakes, hurricanes, droughts, and diseases that may drastically reduce or entirely wipe out accumulated resources. Evolutionary theory suggests that, under conditions like these, cooperative systems of mutual aid can evolve between interdependent individuals who rely on one another to survive (Aktipis et al., 2018).

One such cooperative system is risk pooling: taking on some of another party’s risk in exchange for their willingness to take on some of one’s own risk (Cashdan, 1985; Dorfman, 2007). Humans across the world pool risk to deal with unpredictable ecological challenges (Cronk, Berbesque, et al., 2019). For example, hunter-gatherer groups engage in egalitarian food sharing at centralised locations to pool the risk associ- ated with hunting highly variable large-game food items (Cashdan

keywords
#risk-pooling
#economic-games
#resource-visability







# feng "a unified theory of decentralized insurance"

Great writing on the rise of insurance. 

Discusses different types of mutualization, or sharing of risk between peers. 

keywords
#risk-pooling
#mutualization
#insurance






# richter "methods of risk pooling in business logistics"

Dissertation_Gerald_Oeser.pdf

Thesis and long discussion of risk pooling in supply chain. One key phrase:

Risk pooling is described “to hedge uncertainty so that the firm is in a better position to miti- gate the consequence of uncertainty”96, “enables one to avoid [...] uncertainty”97, or “removes some of the uncertainty involved in planning stock levels”98.

Risk pooling helps a company to cope with demand and/or lead time uncertainty and thus to carry out these value activities at a lower cost for a given service level, a higher service level for a given cost, or a combination of both40



keywords
#risk-pooling
#business-logistics
#supply-chain










# smith "risk pooling in health care financing"

eResearch_3377.pdf

Describes different ways of pooling money for healthcare costs




In contrast to many of life’s necessities, an individual’s need for health care is uncertain. While an individual’s expenditure on (say) food is regular and largely predictable, that same individual’s expenditure on health care is to largely unknowable, both in magnitude and timing. It is therefore intrinsically difficult for an individual to make financial provision for episodes of sickness or even chronic health care needs. Furthermore, if (as is generally accepted) most individuals are risk averse, they would value arrangements that protect them from this uncertainty in expenditure.
Despite this large uncertainty, health care expenditure needs of individuals can often, to some extent, be predicted. Other things being equal, older people tend to have higher spending needs than younger people (except for the very young), and people with chronic health conditions tend to have higher spending needs than healthy individuals. To the extent that characteristics such as age and health status can be measured, predictions of health care spending for a particular individual can be improved.


There are two broad categories of argument in favor of risk pooling in health care, reflecting equity and efficiency considerations. The equity arguments reflect the view society does not feel that it is fair that individuals should assume all the risk associated with their health care expenditure needs. Instead, all or some of that risk should be spread across a given risk pool. This implies an equity objective of offering equal access to health care for members of the risk pool in equal need, regardless of their personal circumstances.
In developing countries, the equity argument is particularly acute for two reasons. First, the pattern of burden of disease (still predominantly communicable diseases) is closely related to poverty: the poor (those least able to pay) are the ones most in need to treatment. Second, low absolute levels of income mean that even modest financial contributions can lead to inability to seek treatment or adverse consequences from seeking treatment (such as indebtedness or reduced expenditure on other essential items).


keywords
#risk-pooling
#healthcare












# cronk "common knowledge promotes risk pooling in an experimental economic game"

Good text on risk pooling in anthropology studies. 

Experiment to show that, left to their own devices, people use a "book-keeping" strategy during the game, trying to balance resources between both parties. When you prime people to read about real-world risk pooling, where need-based transfers are popular, then people are much more likely to operate according to a "need-based rule" where resources are transferred based on need.


In the absence of commercial insurance, risk transfer takes place through social networks [5]. The resulting risk pooling (also known as risk sharing) arrangements arise when two or more parties agree to take on some portion of one another’s risk. Participants in such arrange- ments are essentially exchanging the small likelihood of a catastrophic loss for the high likeli- hood of small, manageable losses. This is analogous to the exchange made in commercial insurance of a certain but small and manageable loss in the form of a premium in exchange for coverage in the unlikely event of a large, catastrophic loss. Although commercial insurance has many advantages, risk pooling arrangements also have some notable strengths. For example, insurance policies are very specific, insuring against a single risk or a narrowly defined set of risks and cover a single asset or a narrowly defined set of assets. In contrast, grassroots risk- pooling arrangements can be much more flexible, with a single relationship covering a wide range of assets. Furthermore, in risk-pooling arrangements, the risks covered do not always need to be fully specified in advance [6].



Experimental game

Players interact with one another, in anonymous pair- ings, via a computer interface. Each player has resources that can grow and shrink over time. Each player plays the game first during a seven-period practice session and then during four rounds consisting of twenty periods each. To earn money, players can harvest resources period by period. To remain in the game, players must maintain their resources above a specified threshold level. If a player’s resources fall below that threshold for three consecutive periods, then they are out of the game. During game play, players can see not only their own resource levels but also those of the individuals with whom they have been paired, mimicking the situation among the Maasai in which livestock holdings are publicly visible. At the beginning of each round, players are all given the same amount of resources. During each period, the change in each player’s holdings is determined by how much the player harvests, how much the player received from the other player, how much the player gives to the other player, a natural growth rule, and a random shock. Shocks can be both positive and negative and average zero. Shock sizes are independent of the size of players’ resource stocks. During each period, players have opportunities to decide how much, if any, to harvest, whether to ask their anonymous partner to provide them with additional resources, and whether and how to respond to any requests received from their anonymous partner. Players earned $5 simply for showing up for the experiment. They earned one additional dollar for every fifteen units of the resource they harvested.

Priming and framing experimental games has been shown many times to have an impact on how people play them. For example, simply adding the sentence “Note that your recipient relies on you” (“Recuerda él está en tus manos”) to the instructions for a Dictator Game has been found to increase generosity [46].


We found that subjects who read texts about real-world risk pooling systems followed a strategy that is more in line with need-based transfers than did subjects in the control condition. Participants in the primed condition responded more positively to requests, gave more, engaged in more repetitive asking and giving, and tolerated greater imbalances between amounts given and received than those in the control condition. This suggests that the priming texts moved subjects away from account-keeping behavior, where a balance of debt and credit is expected, to need-based trans- fer behavior.


keywords
#risk-pooling
#need-based-transfers
#economics-game
#abm







# ahanger "why are risk-pooling and risk-sharing arrangements necessary"

Some ok writing on risk pooling in healthcare. 


The WHO considers health financing models with high risk pooled, such as health insurance and prepaid schemes, a promising means for achieving universal health-care cov- erage and promotion health care. A crucial concept in health financing is that of pooling. The WHO defines risk-pooling as the “accumulation and man- agement of revenues in such a way as to ensure that the risk of having to pay for health care is borne by all members of the pool and not by each contribu- tor individually”. The larger degree of pooling, the less people will have to bear the health financial risks. 

risk-pooling as “the practice of bringing several risks together for insurance purposes in order to balance the consequences of the realization of each indi- vidual risk” [4]. Pooling ensures that the risk related to financing health inter- ventions is borne by all the members of the pool and not by each contributor in- dividually. Risk pooling is required because of the large uncertainty in the mag- nitude and timing of an individual’s health care expenditure needs. It implies three redistributive functions: from the rich to the poor, from the healthy to the sick, and from the productive to the unproductive stage of the life cycle [1]


keywords
#risk-pooling-healthcare







# apostolou "why friendships end"

A useful study to mimic for "reasons why doing X." 

Do the same thing for "reasons why people opt into risk pooling schemes."

keywords
#mimic-study





# pando news article on why it started

Pando (303 Holdings, Inc.), a technology company delivering a new way to manage career risk, announced today that it raised over $8 million in Series A funding. The round was led by Core Innovation Capital and included participation from Pear VC, Avalon Ventures, Ulu Ventures, Nimble Ventures, Stanford StartX Fund, WTI and Slow VC. Pando is using the proceeds to build on its success serving professional athletes and develop offerings for entrepreneurs, MBA students and business professionals.

Pando offers a unique product for those who want to take greater control over their career outcomes by incorporating the tried-and-true benefits of diversification. The solution is called pooling. "We built a financial tool for an economy that's increasingly characterized by winner-take-most professions," says CEO Charlie Olson. "It seemed strange to us that so many talented individuals were taking incredible risk with their greatest asset: the ability to earn future income from their chosen career." Co-founder Eric Lax added, "You will not see any venture capital firms touting a single investment as their portfolio strategy. Why, then, do we see this behavior with entrepreneurs, business professionals and athletes? Why should they alone limit themselves to their individual career earnings?"

Pooling enables a group of individuals to come together and contractually pledge a small portion of future earnings - above a hurdle - to a shared pool. Total pool distributions are distributed equally. Pooling gives the benefits of diversification, spreading risk and providing upside if someone else in the pool becomes a superstar. For certain groups of people, there are powerful community benefits too, as there is a motivation to see each other succeed.

In commenting on the capital raise, Pando board member and Managing Partner of Core Innovation Capital, Kat Utecht, said, "Unfortunately, as we're experiencing most acutely in our current environment, there's an element of career volatility that is systemic and beyond our control. When personal or societal crises occur, our instinct is to lean on community and those we believe in most. Our investment in Pando was propelled by this unique insight and their novel approach to transforming this insight into a compelling business."

Pear VC's Mar Hershenson added, "As a former entrepreneur who now spends the majority of my hours working with them, the prospect of creating pools of tomorrow's business leaders is uniquely powerful. I can't think of another product that allows you to share in the upside of people you believe in, spread personal risk, and boost community support. Obviously, we believe this is a terrific opportunity for Pando, but perhaps, it's an even bigger opportunity for entrepreneurs and other business professionals to join with trusted peers who are on track to make a dent in the universe."

keywords
#pando-pooling
#risk-pooling
#pando-reason-for-starting











# feng "peer-to-peer risk sharing with an application to flood risk"


Intro to the math of risk pooling



The design and development of techniques to distribute risk among a group is a major theme of the risk sharing literature. The main benefit for participating in such a pool resides in the fact that an individual can mitigate very large potential losses by either paying premiums into the pool or sharing claims related expenses with other agents. In mathematical terms, assume that there are n agents in a risk sharing pool, where the risk (potential loss) from i-th agent is denoted by X ̃i. Then the entire pool has an aggregate risk given by the sum S = 􏰋ni=1 X ̃i. The fundamental idea of risk sharing is to devise a mechanism that enables agents to distribute risk in a manner that benefits all individuals in the pool. In other words, the i-th agent agrees to take a risk share (pay for loss) Xi based upon an agreement with all other agents. The risk pool should be self sufficient i.e. 􏰋ni=1 X ̃i = 􏰋ni=1 Xi. In addition, each individual’s post-pooling loss distribution should be preferable to the original in some sense, for example Var(Xi) ≤ Var(X ̃i) for all i = 1, . . . , n.
The risk pooling mechanism has a wide range of applications including but not limited to catas- trophic disaster relief, employer benefit exchange, and automobile, life and health insurance. For example, there are many government sponsored multi-country risk pooling platforms that are used to deal with calamities arising from climate change and extreme weather.

keywords
#risk-pooling-math











# Pleasant "reciprocity creates fitness interdependence"


A thesis on reciprocity but contains good writing on risk pooling, or resource pooling. 

Risk-pooling is an effective strategy to spread out risk amongst a group of people; by diluting risk amongst all members, everyone’s individual risk is reduced. If resources are uncertain, various forms of resource pooling and need-based transfers tend to be commonplace (Howe et al. 2016; Gerkey, 2016; Gurven et al. 2000). Communities that have norms of sharing and obligations to help have a buffer against misfortunes that may befall individuals. For example: In East-Africa the Maasai use the Osotua system: if a cattle herder suffers an unfortunate loss, they can rely on their Osotua partner to transfer them cattle (Aktipis et al. 2016). These types of need-based transfers operate based on a simple rule: ask for help only if you need it and provide help if you can give it (Aktipis et al. 2016). It is a simple concept but a powerful way to mitigate risk, and more effective at reducing individual risk than systems that are rooted in debt (Cronk et al. 2019).

Resource pooling is a specific way of engaging in risk pooling. If yields from foraging or hunting are variable, you can protect yourself against starvation by sharing with others when you have an abundance and taking from others when in need. This bears a lot of similarity to systems of direct reciprocity. In highly interdependent groups, tit-for-tat reciprocity is important, but is not a perfect model for the networks of sharing that emerge. This is because needs present themselves unpredictably, therefore maintaining a system of direct reciprocity would be arduous and unstable. Norms of unconditional giving can emerge when the costs of sharing are low and your stake in those within your group is non-zero (Schnegg, 2015). This vested stake fosters cooperation beyond the confines of direct reciprocity, such that people are willing to help without expectation of repayment, and even when their actions are anonymous. This eliminates the need for record keeping and remembering past deeds, and it can effectively reduce individual risk within the group.

keywords
#risk-pooling
#resource-pooling









# Herriott "the organizational economics of risk pooling"

Risk pooling vs risk sharing.

One structure is the "risk sharing" situation, in which a single risk is faced in common by the participants and which will result in a joint payoff or liability to be shared among them. This model may also be called the Wilson syndicate (Wilson, 1968). Examples include the common result of a joint R&D project or of oil exploration in a commonly owned field.

The second type of organization in the examples above can be termed a "risk pool." In this situation, each participant in the pool faces their own realization of a random variable. The opportunity that participants have to diversify their risks through a process of pooling and sharing creates an incentive to organize. Examples include situations where firms face individual liability for environmental damage or municipal hazards, where they run the risk of inventory stock-outs of all types, explore for oil on their own separate fields, and so on. The risk pool differs from the syndicate, because the members of a risk pool face individual risks, while the members of a syndicate face a common risk.

The pool must find a way to divide up the members' individual risks and to distribute these among the members in a manner that makes everyone better off. Viewed in this way, the risk pool appears to be a simple exchange economy, much like that of a school cafeteria where each child brings his or her own lunch box and trades bits and pieces with the others before finally settling down to eat. If it had this structure, the pool would (under reasonable assumptions) have a unique competitive equilibrium that would be supported by the use of a price mechanism among the participants. No norms of distributive justice would be required to obtain a unique solution, and no central hierarchy would be needed to implement them. The "market" would solve the organizational problem.


#risk-sharing
#risk-pooling









# how to edit prose. Clean writing. Clarity


Lanham, Revising Prose.pdf

Simon's reference on how to write well. He uses it for college classes. 


#on-writing-well
#good-writing
#who-is-kicking-who
#clarity












# cohen & hammer "is autism an extreme form of the male brain"

Great paper on true male and female sex and psychological differences. 

The sexes differ biologically. This much is uncontroversial. But the statement "the sexes differ psychologically" has weathered considerable controversy. This is without doubt because the scientific question ("do the sexes differ psychologically?") has been repeatedly confused with the political question ("should the sexes be treated as equals?"). 

women are superior to men on
- language tasks
- language development
- empathy and cooperation
- rapid identification of matching items
- fine-motor coordination

men are superior to women on
- mathematical reasoning, especially geometry and word problems
- 'finding a part within a whole' task
- mental rotation task
- guiding or intercepting projectiles


keywords
#sex-differences
#males-females-differ














# zhou, valentine "dream team: multi arm bandits for identifying effective team structures"

The rules and norms teams use to guide their interactions and task work depends on the task and the preferences of the individuals. 

For some tasks (and people), hierarchical communication is better. For some tasks (and people), flat is better. 

In this paper, the authors built a software system and used it to improve the performance of teams.

The system:
- sample one team structures (feedback norms, decision making norms, interaction norms)
- enforce that team structure via a robot in slack when the team is performing task at t
- save performance
- randomly sample another team structure
- enforce the new team structure on the team via a robot in slack
- save performance
- over time, the system samples different structures and allows the team to evolve into the one in which it performs best on

Huge finding:

Among the highest performing teams undergoing this system (compared to control teams), no two teams had the same final team structures. 

The right set of team structures depends on the team, even for teams working on the exact same task. 

So, what should managers do?
- team charter
- allow the team to alter its charter over time


Christopher issues with the study
- no clarity on what the bot actually did
- it is one thing to build an algorithm that samples team structures
- it is another to implement and enforce team structures by using a robot on slack
- e.g., "be super cheery. make sure to encourage your teammates" "if ignored or not taken seriously, no compensation"
- the authors do not provide info on how the team structures map onto different enforcement mechanisms

keywords
#great-paper
#robot-coordination
#robot-intervention
#human-computer-interaction
#dream-team-structures
#evolving-team-structures



